Clunaic reforms said to be important, kindof sound like Gregorian reforms but as of now a mystery what they actually entailed and who supported them


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluniac_Reforms
	The Cluniac Reforms (also called the Benedictine Reform)[1] were a series of changes within medieval monasticism of the Western Church focused on restoring the traditional monastic life, encouraging art, and caring for the poor. The movement began within the Benedictine order at Cluny Abbey, founded in 910 by William I, Duke of Aquitaine (875–918).The reforms were largely carried out by Saint Odo (c. 878 – 942) and spread throughout France (Burgundy, Provence, Auvergne, Poitou), into England (the English Benedictine Reform), and through much of Italy and Spain.[2]

	In the early 10th century, Western monasticism, which had flourished several centuries earlier with St Benedict of Nursia, was experiencing a severe decline due to unstable political and social conditions resulting from the nearly continuous Viking raids, widespread poverty and, especially, the dependence of abbeys on the local nobles who controlled all that belonged to the territories under their jurisdiction.

	The impetus for the reforms lay in abuses thought to be a result of secular interference in the monasteries and of the Church's tight integration with the feudal and manorial systems. Since a Benedictine monastery required land, it needed the patronage of a local lord. However, the lord would often demand rights and assert prerogatives that interfered with the operation of the monastery.[3] Patrons normally retained a proprietary interest and expected to install their kinsmen as abbots. Local aristocrats often established churches, monasteries, and convents that they then considered as family property, taking revenues from them, and leaving the monks that remained subsisting in poverty.[4]

	Some monasteries were established by feudal lords with the intention of retiring there at some point. The Benedictine Rule, in these monasteries, was modified to schedule matins when it would not interrupt sleep, and expanded the vegetarian diet. Monks in these houses wore richer, warmer clothing and were free to disregard the rules pertaining to fasting.[5] The Cluny reform was an attempt to remedy these practices in the hope that a more independent abbot would better enforce the Rule of Saint Benedict.


wikipedia says clunaic reforms were against secular interference with church, I guess like Gregorian reforms


	...Among the most notable supporters of the Cluniac reforms were Pope Urban II,[7] Lambert of Hersfeld, and Richard of Verdun. The reforms encouraged the Church in the West to be more attentive to business and led the papacy to attempt to assert control over the Eastern Church.[7]


	...Result

	During its height (c. 950–c.1130), the Cluniac movement was one of the largest religious forces in Europe.[8] At least as significantly as their political consequences, the reforms demanded greater religious devotion. The Cluniacs supported the Peace of God, and promoted pilgrimages to the Holy Lands.[3] An increasingly rich liturgy stimulated demand for altar vessels of gold, fine tapestries and fabrics, stained glass, and polyphonic choral music to fill the Romanesque churches.[6]



...


http://medievalchurchhistory.blogspot.com/2012/09/lesson-17-cluny-910-and-monastic-reform.html
	Q:   How did the imperial monasteries view Cluny?
    A:   Imperial monasteries viewed Cluniac reform with reserve and in some cases with opposition.   
       They are committed to the Ottonian imperial Church


https://books.google.com/books?id=m6s-AQAAMAAJ&pg=PA215&lpg=PA215
	...Both Adelheid and [Otto III] were enthusiastic promoters of the Cluniac Reform which was rapidly spreading from Burgundy to France, Germany, Italy and England.


which was it?


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=3kVSstTNv4EC&pg=PA206&lpg=PA206
	In looking for capable and trustworthy men to help with governing the kingdom, Otto finally decided to use members of the upper clergy, particularly the bishops and the archbishops. Usually these men were at least moderately educated. In supervising their own diocese, they had gained administrative experience. And since the church insisted on celibacy for the clergy, there was no danger of untrustworthy sons inheriting the position and thus working against the emperor. But in order that the bishops might have the power to govern effectively, it was necessary for Otto to give them authority. In the Middle Ages, authority always came from control of the land. Thus Otto distributed vast amounts of royal land into the hands of the bishops. Certainly he would want to keep personal enemies out of positions that he had made powerful by grants of his own land.


Otto liked to put bishops and archbishops in charge of running the kingdom and gave them land


	As a result, more and more of the selections of bishops and even their installation fell into the hands of the emperor. This was not a situation of a free church being subverted into a state-controlled church; the choice rather was between a church controlled by local, unscrupulous counts and dukes, and a church controlled by the king for the good of the country as a whole. In General Otto made good episcopal appointments. He also participated in the installation service, called investiture, by "investing" the new bishop with control over his lands, and giving him the seals of authority of his office: the bishop's staff, the episcopal pallium to be worn around his neck, the bishop's ring, and often a scepter, to symbolize the authority over the king's land. The criticism that came later was not that the emperor was installing incompetents, but that a layman was both selecting the bishops and investing them with the symbols of their office. This is the very thing that concerned the Cluniac reform movement. But in the context of the tenth century, the Cluniac movement was not very significant yet, and Otto was making good appointments for the improvement of the church.


The emperor was in charge of more and more of the selection and installation of bishops. Authors say Otto generally made good appointments. Otto was doing investiture of bishops which is what the Cluniac reform opposed, but Cluniac reform was not very significant yet at the time of the 10th century.

	
	Otto showed further interest in church reform by his involvement in Italian politics and the papacy itself. After the death of Alberic in 954, petty Italian figures began to build positions of power for themselves, and they cast greedy eyes upon the papacy. Thus once again the papacy needed a strong outside protector. John XII had earlier resisted Otto's efforts to mediate in the Italian problems, but in 960 the pope requested Otto to come down. Otto came the next year, and early in 962 John crowned him Emperor.


Otto was "interested in church reform" and authors tie this to his involvement in Italian politics and papacy.


	Otto protected John from some of his enemies, but that did not mean Otto approved of John's lifestyle. Rather, he was appalled. Immediately after the coronation ceremony, the emperor took the young pope aside and gave him a lecture on his moral habits. John promised repentance, but he worked instead to undermine Otto's position in Italy. The local politics became complicated, but Otto could forget about John after May of 964. An outraged husband came home to find the pope in bed with his wife; he beat the pope so badly that he died of his injuries three days later. For the next several years, Emperor Otto supervised appointments to the papacy.


According to authors, Otto was appalled by Pope John's lifestyle and tried to intervene in his wicked ways to mediate and help church reforms. Otto lectured John, but he didn't listen and worked to undermine Otto, complicating Italian politics. Fortunately, an outraged husband beat John to death after catching John in bed with his wife, and Otto supervised papal appointments thereafter.


	Otto III (982-1002), the grandson of Otto I, decided to take a firm hand in Rome in 996. The papal throne was vacant at the time, and Otto appointed his cousin Bruno as Pope Gregory V (996-999), the first German pope. When he was killed by poison, Otto put in the first French pope, his former tutor Sylvester II (999-1003). Otto himself was poisoned in 1002, and rumor had it that the same hand poisoned the pope the following year. The new emperor in Germany, Henry II (1002-1024), was not interested in the Italian situation, which meant that the local families of the nobility again fell to power plots among themselves, each trying to secure the papacy as a basis of strength. The Crescenti family controlled three papal appointments from 1003 to 1012, and then the Tusculum family controlled three more from 1012 to 1045. Moral and spiritual deterioration of the papacy set in again.



------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_(archbishop_of_Mainz)
	William (929 – 2 March 968) was Archbishop of Mainz from 17 December 954 until his death. He was the son of the Emperor Otto I the Great and a Wendish (West Slavs living near the German border) mother.[1]

	On 17 December 954, he was appointed to the archbishopric of Mainz following the death of the rebellious former archbishop Frederick. William received confirmation from Pope Agapetus II and also the title of Apostolic Vicar of Germany, a title which made the archbishops of Mainz the pope's deputies in Germany and granted the archdiocese of Mainz the title of Holy See. From his father William also received the title of "Arch-Chaplain of the Empire."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frederick_(archbishop_of_Mainz)
	Frederick (died October 954) was the Archbishop of Mainz from 937, following the late Hildebert, until his death. He was a son of Reginar, Duke of Lorraine.[citation needed]

	Immediately, Frederick acted as an opponent of Otto the Great, one of the most consistent opponents he faced. In 939, he joined the rebellion of Eberhard III of Franconia, Gilbert of Lorraine, and Henry I of Bavaria. He was imprisoned in Hammelburg for a while. He plotted with Henry to assassinate Otto in Easter 941 in Quedlinburg, but they were discovered and put in captivity in Ingelheim, being released and pardoned only after doing penance at Christmas of that year.

	Frederick refused to accompany Otto to Italy in 951. He participated in another rebellion with Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, and Conrad, Duke of Lorraine, luring the king to Mainz in 953. Abandoned by the Lorrainers and without Henry's support this time, the rebels were easily crushed and punished. Frederick tried to distance himself from the fighting, but died before anything could come to him.


why did some bishops oppose Otto and some support him?



------
