https://books.google.com/books?id=TrlRaHFHspsC&pg=PT215&lpg=PT215&dq=Oppenheimer+Weinberg+FBI+1943&source=bl&ots=FWGp88XSbK&sig=iehHdP2mpcROIAtKaXKirn3E27s&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjLmIrvhu_ZAhVi0oMKHdXZB3EQ6AEIYDAI#v=onepage&q=Oppenheimer%20Weinberg%20FBI%201943&f=false


The Venona Secrets: Exposing Soviet Espionage and America's Traitors
By Herbert Romerstein, Eric Breindel


in this part basically going over case that Oppenheimer was a Soviet spy


	...The evidence is clear that the NKVD had contact with Oppenheimer and that the nuclear scientist and his wife were surrounded by people with Soviet intelligene connections. But since this was only circumstantial evidence, it does not prove that Oppenheimer provided secret information to the Soviets. The direct evidence was given by Pavel Sudoplatov, Moscow-based overseer of Soviet atom bomb espionage, who claimed in his 1994 book, Special Tasks, that Oppenheimer supplied the Soviets with classified reports on atom bomb development. He also said that some of the information came through the wife of the NKVD Rezident in the United States, Zarubina, who traveled frequently to California and was in direct contact with Oppenheimer's wife, Kitty.

	Sudoplatov's claims created a firestorm in the American press. The American Physical Society held a press conference in which five "experts" denounced the statements about Oppenheimer "as wildly innacurate and probably fictitious." And the organization's forty-member council expressed "profound dismay" at the accusations "made by a man who has characterized himself as a master of deception and deceit." Numerous other scientists, journalists, and others with no direct knowledge of the case joined the protest.

	The old KGB operative Sudoplatov might possibly have lied to his coauthors, Jerry and Leona Schecter, who were experienced journalists, but the Schecters found documentary evidence to back his story. Sudoplatov had been jailed in 1953 by the Soviet government because of his close association with the then-discredited Lavarenti Beria. In 1968 he was released and tried in succeeding years to get a Communist Party hearing to rehabilitate him and restore him to the good graces of Soviet leadership. In 1982, for example, he sent an appeal to Yuri Andropov and the Politburo outlining his career and asking for rehabilitation. In this secret document, Sudoplatov boasted that he had "rendered considerable help to your scientists by giving them the latest materials on atom bomb research, obtained from such sources as the famous nuclear physicists R. Oppenheimer, E. Fermi, K. Fuchs, and others." It would have made no sense for Sudoplatov to lie to Andropov, the former head of the KGB and dictator of the Soviet Union, who would have easily found him out.

	Until Sudoplatov's testimony, even Venona could not prove that Oppenheimer had collaborated with Soviet intelligence; the only conclusion had to have been a Scotch verdict--unproved--or, as the NSA commented, "troubling." But with Sudoplatov's information we can say for certain that Oppenheimer did in fact knowingly supply classified information on the atomb bom to the Soviet Union.

	In May 1995, Les Aspin, former U.S. defense secretary and then chairman of the president's Foreign INtelligence Advisory Board, reopened the issue. He held a press conference on May 1 in which he released a letter from Louis J. Freeh, the director of the FBI, which stated, "The FBI is not in possession of any credible evidence that would suggest that Neils Bohr, Enrico Fermi, Robert Oppenheimer, or Leo Szilard engaged in any espionage activity on behalf of any foreign power to include that involving atomic bomb secrets. Indeed, the FBI has classified information available that argues against the conclusions reached by the author of Special Tasks [Sudoplatov]. The FBI, therefore, considers such allegations to be unfounded."

	Aspin explained at the press conference that he had "negotiated" the text of the letter with FBI director Freeh. He did not explain why a simple statement of the truth needed to be negotiated, unless it wasn't exactly true. A number of the people present at the press conference, including Jerry Shecter and Herb Romerstein, challenged Aspin's conclusions. Aspin responded, "You can believe what you want... This is not, I presume, the last word on this subject."


Sudoplatov alleged Oppenheimer a Soviet spy (in sense of stealing secrets) but others opposed him

if he were a spy, he didn't get much political help from them in press or in hearings...


	...The reaction in Moscow to Sudoplatov's revelations was mixed. In December 1993--before the book came out--at a celebration of the anniversery of the KGB held in the headquarters of its successor, the SVR, there was a standing ovation for Sudoplatov as the "living history of the service." But when the book was released, the SVR spokeswoman Tatyan Samolis issued a statement denying that Oppenheimer had ever provided any atomic bomb information to the Soviet Union.

	But other KGB retirees leaked information to the Russian press that bolstered Sudoplatov's story. In May 1996 Pravda carried an article based on SVR sources saying that documents obtained from Oppenheimer and other important Western scientists are still in the secret Soviet archives. The Pravda article went on:

		It is no secret that first-hand informatio on [a] nuclear reaction experiment performed in 1942 by the Italian physicist E. Fermin in Chicago was obtained thorugh scientists close to Oppenheimer. The source of this information was a former staff member of the Comintern, G. Kheifitz, our Rezident in California and a former secretary to N. Krupskaya [Lenin's wife.] He was the one who informed Moscow of the fact that the development of the nuclear bomb is a practical reality. By this time, Kheifitz had established contact with Oppenheimer and his circle. In fact, the Oppenheimer family, in particular this brother, had links with the then illegal Communist Party of the U.S. on the West Coast. One of the locations for illegal meetings and contacts was the house of the socialite Madam Bransetn in San Francisco. It is precisely here that Oppenheimer and Kheifitz met. For our intelligence, people who were sympathetic to Communist ideas were extremely valuable for establishing contacts... Madam Bransten's salon lasted from 1936 to 1942. The Soviets supported it. Kheifitz helped transfer the funds for its financing.

	Sudoplatov sided in September 1996. For most of this life, he used espionage, assassination, and repression against the West and any Russians who might oppose the Soviet dictatorship. It is ironic that only two years before his death, he provided the world with significant evidence about the Soviet agents who stole the secrets of the atom bomb.


I think they like him because he acted like a spy without actually being a spy

a lot of the litmus tests you'd use to guess if someone was a Soviet spy show up positive for Oppenhemer

was communist, lied to FBI, in constant contact with Soviet spies, ended up bringing some spies onto Manhattan project I think?

they could argue that allegations that other historical figures were spies are hypocritical or call them into question, since I guess some of the same arguments could work for Oppenheimer

goes back to question of: dupe or player? incompetent or malicious? and they like to confuse people with that. Consider all the propaganda telling wobblies to sabotage U.S. industry, then a saboture comes in and does the same on orders from the Okhrana. Was he just another crazy Wobbly or a spy? it is cover for them. I think they will always try to confuse this way.
