

http://blog.nuclearsecrecy.com/2014/10/17/riddle-julius-rosenberg/


good article on atomic espionage, case of rosenbergs


	Part of the problem, from a latter-day point of view, is that Julius Rosenberg, by the very nature of his lack of confession, is a Sphinx. On his motivations and justifications, he is silent — he never told his side of the story, the real, non-B.S. side of the story. It makes him feel cold to me, gazing out from those pictures. I find myself saying: “Why’d you do it?” We know he spied. If he had just told us why, maybe we could understand, and have some empathy. But he took his side of the story to his grave.

	It is a very different situation than with Klaus Fuchs, Theodore Hall, Harry Gold, and even David Greenglass. Fuchs confessed at length about his motivations, his feelings on the subject. He felt the Soviets were owed the information, as those who were bleeding the most during the war against Fascism. Hall was very young at the time of his espionage, but one can recognize and sympathize with the naive politics of youth. And Hall’s central belief, that maybe the world would be safer without just one country having atomic weapons, is not actually a totally naive position — it is the essence of deterrence theory, for better or worse. Gold’s way into espionage was not ideological, but psychological: he was a needy person and fell in with the wrong crowd, who exploited his near-pathological desire to please. (When he was caught by the FBI, they exploited this as well in turning him into a key witness.)


Oppenheimer's idea that it wasn't right that the bomb wasn't shared with the Soviets was the motivation or stated motivation for Fucks, Hall, Gold and Greenglass. It sounds like he believed it since that's what he told investigators. It might very well be that they expected Oppenheimer to turn spy for them. I guess they were cultivating him for that. 


https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/klaus-fuchs-arrested-for-passing-atomic-bomb-information-to-soviets
	Fuchs and his family fled Germany in 1933 to avoid Nazi persecution and came to Great Britain, where Fuchs earned his doctorate in physics. During World War II, British authorities were aware of the leftist leanings of both Fuchs and his father. However, Fuchs was eventually invited to participate in the British program to develop an atomic bomb (the project named “Tube Alloys”) because of his expertise. At some point after the project began, Soviet agents contacted Fuchs and he began to pass information about British progress to them.


understandable how Fuchs could come to believe that--Nazis were after him and this was personal

is this a pattern? a lot of scientists persecuted by Nazis went to the U.S. and Britain and worked on the bomb, and this history makes it easier to sympathize with Soviets (and so makes it easier to dupe them into sympathizing with the Soviet government


who created the nazis)


------


http://www.famous-trials.com/rosenberg/2219-goldtestimony
	GOLD: In other words, if we were just going to discuss the possibility of obtaining certain types of information, the hazards involved, just how much information should be obtained and just what source was needed, then a rather long meeting was scheduled. If I was going to actually get information, very usually a brief meeting was scheduled, the idea being to minimize the time of detection when information would be passed from the American to me. In addition to this I made payments of sums of money to some of the people whom I regularly contacted and always I wrote reports detailing everything that happened at every meeting with these people; and these reports I turned over to Yakovlev.

	...GOLD The money was given to me by Yakovlev....This is how it worked: We had an arrangement not only for regular meetings but we had an arrangement for alternate meetings, should one of the regular ones not take place, and then in addition to that we had an arrangement for an emergency meeting. This emergency meeting was a one-way affair. A system was set up whereby Yakovlev could get in touch with me if he wanted me quickly. but I couldn't get in touch with him because I didn't know where. Yakovlev told me that in this way the chain was cut in two places. The person from whom I got the information in America did not know me by my true name, nor did he know where I lived, nor could he get in touch with me and I couldn't get in touch with Yakovlev. Yakovlev said this was a good thing.

	...GOLD: I would take the information and put it between the folds of a newspaper and Yakovlev and I would exchange the newspapers. The one that I got was just a newspaper. The one that he got had the information between the folds, the information usually being in some sort of an enclosure.

	...GOLD: Yakovlev then gave me a piece of paper; it was onionskin paper, and on it was typed the following: First, the name "Greenglass," just "Greenglass." Then a number [on] "High Street"; all that I can recall about the number is . . . it was a low number and . . . the second figure was "0" and the last figure was either 5, 7 or 9; then underneath was "Albuquerque, New Mexico." The last thing that was on the paper was "Recognition signal. I come from Julius."



Gold talks about all the spy shit he does. Probably info they didn't want him to give if he were still working for them (assuming this is legit looks that way)


http://jewishjournal.com/culture/arts/83590/
	Hornblum points out that Gold has been obscured by more than a half-century of spin by those who sought to exonerate the Rosenbergs.  “[E]ither he was a traitor who had sold his country down the river or he was a delusional psychotic,” the author explains of Gold’s depiction. “He seemed to be made to order for bullies, whether they were neighborhood ruffians who beat him up with their fists or polysyllabic political activists who used a pen and a typewriter.”  After retrieving and reviewing the hard evidence, Hornblum concludes that “it was Gold who told the truth about his career as a spy, and Julius Rosenberg who lied….”


	...Gold was a reluctant recruit to the Communist cause in the 1930s. Although he resisted the urgings of a friend to join the party, he agreed to conduct espionage against his employer, the Pennsylvania Sugar Company, whose industrial solvents were of interest to the USSR. Young Gold was impressed by the fact that “the Soviet Union had become the first nation to make ‘anti-Semitism a crime against the state,’” but he later admitted that he suffered from an “almost suicidal impulse” to do things that he knew were wrong or even illegal.  At it turned out, his lifelong shyness turned out to be a desirable quality in a spy: “To avoid surveillance, he would walk on the dark side of the street and eat in restaurants with booths rather than at a table in the open,” writes Hornblum. “No one would ever suspect that the dumpy fellow with the odd gait and glum expression was a Soviet spy trading in industrial and military secrets.” 


	...For his willingness to confess and testify against his former comrades, Gold was rewarded with a prison term even longer than the one demanded by the federal prosecutor. He served just over half of the 30-year sentence, was paroled in 1966 and died in obscurity in 1972. His very obscurity was a goad to Hornblum: “How must Harry Gold have felt over the years as the punching bag of choice for many Rosenberg defenders,” the author muses, “who subjected him to a level of scrutiny that Julius and Ethel Rosenberg never could have withstood?”


judge gave him longer prison sentence even though he was helpful, everyone in press attacked him

sounds like he grew a conscience


	...“The Invisible Harry Gold” restores Gold to history and, in rich and intriguing ways, it enriches the tragic saga of the Rosenberg case.  Even those who insist on seeing the Rosenbergs as victims will find something new, important and compelling in Hornblum’s book. 


I think I see a pattern...



http://blog.nuclearsecrecy.com/2014/10/17/riddle-julius-rosenberg/
	Ethel was much more problematic. What she knew, or didn’t know, about the spy operation isn’t as clear. Julius got code-names in the VENONA transcripts (“Antenna” and “Liberal”), which indicate he was something of a key asset. Ethel’s code-name was… “Ethel,” indicating she was not. Did she know what Julius and her brother were up to? It seems hard to imagine she did not. Did she deserve the electric chair? Maybe, maybe not. I happen to be on the side that thinks that capital punishment for an espionage crime committed in the service of a state that was then an ally is extreme. Much less for someone whose role, like Ethel’s, was probably fairly minor. It is clear, from the historical record, that pushing for the death penalty for both was part of a strategy to scare the two into cooperating, and to scare others who dared not to cooperate. I don’t think executing them achieved anything like justice.

	But I have some real problems feeling sympathy and empathy for the Rosenbergs. They maintained their absolute innocence all the way through their executions. They left two children as orphans. They created fissures in American politics that still resonate to this day, with Cold War liberals absolutely convinced of their innocence, and Cold War hawks convinced of their being traitors. The by-product was an ugly polarization of American Cold War politics that was potentially avoidable. Now we know that at least Julius was guilty, and that he lied to everyone, repeatedly. He had the choice to avoid the chair. He chose to be a martyr. And, again, to orphan his children.

	I find that hard to respect. Who was he protecting? Stalin? The Communist Party? His reputation? It is hard to conceive what cause would be worth what he did. It is one thing to doom himself, but another to doom his wife. And I keep coming back to the children. Who would do that to their children? Both of the children were, until relatively recently, defenders of the innocence of their parents, which makes perfect sense. What a crushing blow to believe the contrary.

	Part of the problem, from a latter-day point of view, is that Julius Rosenberg, by the very nature of his lack of confession, is a Sphinx. On his motivations and justifications, he is silent — he never told his side of the story, the real, non-B.S. side of the story. It makes him feel cold to me, gazing out from those pictures.


https://www.nytimes.com/1974/02/14/archives/1972-death-of-harry-gold-revealed.html
	Forgery Charged

	In 1966, lawyers for Morton Sobell who were seeking to overturn his 30‐year sentence for espionage conspiracy with the Rosenbergs, charged that the F.B.I. had forged a 1945 hotel‐reservation card at the Albuquerque Hilton. The card purported to show that Mr. Gold had indeed met Mr. Greenglass in that New Mexico city.

	It was the Government's only documentary evidence to show that Mr. Gold was in Albuquerque at the time he, said he received secrets from Mr. Greenglass. The forgery charges were based on assertions in “Invitation to an Inquest,” a book on the Rosenberg case written in 1965 by Walter ad Miriam Schnier.

	Mr. Sobell's plea was denied but he was released from jail in June, 1969. Mr. Greenglass, who was sentenced to 15 years on conspiracy charges in the Rosenberg case, was released from jail in 1960. His present whereabouts could not be determined yesterday.

	Mr. Gold, according to Mr. Ballard, always insisted that his testimony was truthful. He was upset, the lawyer said, by attempts to impeach his credibility.

	After his release from Lewisburg, Mr. Gold worked quietly at the Kennedy Memorial Hospital. He was attached to the hospital's School of Certified Laboratory Assistants, to which he bequeathed a share of his estate. Other parts went to his brother, to the Philadelphia Orchestra, to the Temple University Music Festival and to Mr. Ballard.



------


https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/news/20080911/PP%20-%20Rosenberg%20Spy%20Case%20Chronology.pdf

Rosenberg epsionage case chronology

a lot of testimony's weren't released until 2008


------


https://catalog.archives.gov/id/2538316

Gold testimony



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1992/10/04/how-soviets-stole-us-atom-secrets/1ebc1feb-7d1d-476b-8f85-d9ea08a60fa9
	While the bare outlines of one of the espio-nage coups of the century have been known to Western governments since the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg in 1951, the full extent of Soviet penetration of the U.S. atom bomb project is only now becoming apparent. In an interview with The Washington Post, former Soviet spy master Anatoly Yatskov claimed that the FBI had succeeded in uncovering "only half, perhaps less than half" of his network of agents in the United States.

	"No other intelligence service in the world succeeded in penetrating the wall of secrecy around the Manhattan Project," boasted Yatskov, who is better known in the United States as Anatoly Yakovlev, the Soviet diplomat who was indicted in the Rosenberg case but, having returned to Moscow in 1946, was never brought to trial. "We {intelligence agents} performed an important service. We helped Russia achieve strategic parity with the United States much sooner than would otherwise have been the case."


Is that how they saw it? The U.S. was stronger than Russia militarily, but with both having the bomb things became more even


	While acknowledging that some of his information came from the British atom spy Klaus Fuchs, Yatskov insists that another scientist inside the experimental nuclear station at Los Alamos, N.M., also was passing secret information to Moscow. Soviet intelligence documents indicate that the agent, who Yatskov said is still alive, joined the Manhattan Project in 1942, at least 18 months before Fuchs arrived in the United States. This agent was code-named "Perseus," or simply "Mr. X."

	Perseus evidently played such an important part in the network that -- if his existence is confirmed -- it would relegate the Rosenbergs' role in supplying atomic secrets to Moscow to the periphery.


why are they saying this now?


	...By invading the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, Adolf Hitler made politics a good deal simpler for left-wing scientists and intellectuals in the West. Up until that moment, many of them had found their sympathies toward the Soviet Union shaken by the 1938 Nazi-Soviet nonaggression pact. But as the German armies swept through Ukraine, their doubts were swept away. Their duty was now clear: to do everything in their power to help the Soviets bear the brunt of Nazi aggression.


sounds right

a lot of times see "experts" and others say the Nazi-Soviet nonaggression pact disgusted people and turned them away from Soviet causes in a mocking way. Maybe it did sometimes? Oppenheimer charaterised communists as being blindly for Soviet policy and making excuses for pact.

Operation Barbarossa probably erased that, since people would see the Nazis breaking promise and killing a lot of people in the process. The Soviets early losses in that war could be exploited for recruitment abroad. 


	...There are some contradictions and inconsistencies in Chikov's version of how Perseus was recruited, which make his New Times article a somewhat unreliable source. But unless the Russian intelligence agency is playing a gigantic hoax


hehe


	...The recruitment of Perseus in the United States appears to have roughly coincided with the recruitment of Fuchs in Britain. A refugee from Nazi Germany, Fuchs had been working on a top secret atom project code-named Tube Alloys. In late 1941, as German troops were sweeping toward Moscow, he volunteered his services to the Soviet Union. His first contact, he later confessed, was the London station chief of the GRU military intelligence agency.


says Fuchs motivated by Nazi invasion of Soviets


	In Moscow, meanwhile, Stalin and his aides were too preoccupied with the German invasion to pay much attention to the information flowing in from their intelligence agents.


like the intelligence that the invasion was imminent in the first place?


	...At first, both Stalin and Beria were skeptical about the intelligence reports. Beria feared that the Western allies might be attempting to trick the Kremlin into vast expenditures of money and manpower. "If this is disinformation, I'll throw you all into jail," the secret police chief roared, according to Yatskov.

	The paranoia of Stalin and Beria was somewhat allayed by the enthusiastic response of Kurchatov, the Soviet Union's top nuclear scientist. In a note dated March 7, 1943, Kurchatov reported that information from Britain (apparently from Fuchs) would force Soviet scientists to revise many of their previous theories about nuclear reaction and the production of uranium-235.

	Kurchatov conceded it was possible that the material could be a hoax, designed to distract Soviet scientists from other more important tasks.


this is hard to believe

why is author reporting this?


	...Yatskov also acted as the Soviet controller of Harry Gold, the Swiss-born chemist who served as a courier for Fuchs after he joined the Los Alamos project in mid-1944. But he denies knowing the Rosenbergs, who were named as Soviet spies by Gold in 1951 and later executed. It is impossible to tell whether his denial is genuine or motivated by a wish to support the repeated claims of innocence by the Rosenbergs.


venona not released until 1995, this article was 1992


	...Although most of the recently released documents deal with the atom bomb, one dated Dec. 31, 1946, suggests that Western scientists also supplied information to Moscow about the more sophisticated hydrogen bomb. The document is a note from Kurchatov to KGB chiefs acknowledging the receipt of information about "American work on the superbomb," as the H-bomb was known.


started working on H-bomb right away?




https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB_djvu.txt
	107. Suggestions to the contrary derive chiefly from two 
sources: a fabricated version of the career of PERS 
(renamed PERSEUS), apparently devised by the SVR for 
purposes of mystification, perhaps to protect Theodore 
Hall (cf. Albright and Kunstel, Bombshell, p. 271; 
Weinstein and Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood, pp. 190- 
\n.)\ and the fallible memory of Pavel Sudoplatov, far 
less reliable on atomic espionage than on the “special 
actions” to which he devoted most of his career (cf 
Holloway, “Sources for Stalin and the Bomb''). The New 
York residency was dismayed to learn early in 1945 that 
FOGEL/PERS had declined an offer of employment as a 
construction engineer at Los Alamos, probably owing to a 
mixture of family pressures and fear of exposure. 
Weinstein and Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood, p. 192. 


some sort of fakery going on with atom bomb spies? why?

guessed for Oppenheimer to keep people guessing who is a spy, who isn't, what are motivations



------


https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB_djvu.txt
	Fike the 
	Cambridge Five, the Washington moles saw themselves 
	as secret warriors in the struggle against fascism. 
	Wadleigh wrote later: 

	When the Communist International represented the 
	only world force effectively resisting Nazi Germany, 
	I had offered my services to the Soviet underground 
	in Washington as one small contribution to help stem 



	the fascist tide.^ 


saw communists as main opposition to Nazis?

I think there was Nazi activity in the U.S., and Communists in U.S. would oppose them. So living in U.S. (same pattern in other countries?) this might make it easier to see Communists as main force to stop nazis instead of country you live in


	...In  August  1939,  however,  political  intelligence
	operations  in  the  United  States,  as  in  Britain,  were
	partially disrupted by the signing of the Nazi-Soviet Pact.
	Laurence  Duggan  broke  off  contact  with  Akhmerov  in
	protest.
	22
	  Others  who  had  serious  doubts  included
	Michael Straight. At a meeting in October in a restaurant
	below  Washington’s  Union  Station,  Akhmerov  tried  to
	reassure him. “Great days are approaching!” he declared.
	With the beginning of the Second World War, revolution
	would spread like wildfire across Germany and France.
	23
	Straight was unimpressed and failed to attend the next
	meeting.
	24
	 Duggan and Straight are unlikely to have been
	the only agents to break contact, at least temporarily, with
	the NKVD.


Head of Soviet political inel in U.S. says better days ahead and WWII will spread revolution through europe, but not everybody bought it

some broke contact and returned

same problem here: who is acting out of genuine disgust and who is in on the plot?


	...Ovakimyan was probably also the first to suggest using
	an INO officer, under cover as an exchange student, to
	penetrate the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The
	first  such  “student,”  Semyon  Markovich  Semyonov
	(codenamed TVEN), entered MIT in 1938. The scientific
	contacts which he made over the next two years, before
	changing his cover in 1940 to that of an Amtorg engineer,
	helped  to  lay  the  basis  for  the  remarkable  wartime
	expansion of S&T collection in the United States. One of
	his colleagues in the New York residency was struck by
	Semyonov’s “large eyes which, while he was talking to
	somebody,  [revolved]  like  parabolic  antennae.”
	29
	  By
	April 1941 the total NKVD agent network in the United
	States numbered 221, of whom forty-nine were listed in
	NKVD  statistics  as  “engineers”  (probably  a  category
	which included a rather broad range of scientists).


history of penetrating MIT


	...IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE Japanese attack on Pearl
	Harbor  and  Hitler’s  declaration  of  war  on  the  United
	States in December 1941, Vassili Zarubin (alias Zubilin,
	codenamed  MAKSIM)  was  appointed  legal  resident  in
	New  York.  Already  deeply  suspicious  of  British
	commitment to the defeat of Nazi Germany, Stalin also
	had  doubts  about  American  resolve.  He  summoned
	Zarubin before his departure and told him that his main
	assignment  in  the  United  States  was  to  watch  out  for
	attempts  by  Roosevelt  and  “US  ruling  circles”  to
	negotiate  with  Hitler  and  sign  a  separate  peace.


WWI joke?

there would almost certainly have been non-Okhrana agents in the U.S. government during WWI fretting and scheming about the Russian provisional gov signing a separate peace


goes on about communists in OSS


	 ...These boasts
	were far from the truth. Hopkins was an American patriot
	with little sympathy for the Soviet system. But he was
	deeply impressed by the Soviet war effort and convinced
	that, “Since Russia is the decisive factor in the war she
	must be given every assistance and every effort must be
	made  to  obtain  her  friendship


Harry Hopkins retarded or Soviet agent?

is a politician

could be like Al Gore?

Hopkins iirc sounded a lot like Soviet Agent

mixing up with Henry Wallace who might have been retarded

I think all these people would have access to classified info, results of epsionage on Soviets? going back to WWI?

Andrews says U.S. had zero agents in Moscow, which seems doubtful


	...It  was  at  Tehran,  Churchill  later  claimed,  that  he
	realized for the first time how small the British nation
	was:
	There I sat with the great Russian bear on one side of
	me, with paws outstretched, and on the other side the
	great American buffalo, and between the two sat the
	poor little English donkey ...


TODO: read up on Churchill


	...Stalin returned to Moscow in high spirits. The United
	States  and  Britain  seemed  to  have  recognized,  as  a
	Russian  diplomat  put  it  privately,  Russia’s  “right  to
	establish  friendly  governments  in  the  neighboring
	countries.”
	71
	 Roosevelt’s willingness to go so far to meet
	Stalin’s wishes at Tehran had derived chiefly from his
	deep sense of the West’s military debt to the Soviet Union
	at  a  time  when  the  Red  Army  was  bearing  the
	overwhelming brunt of the war with Germany.


initial Russian losses under Stalin were used to convince Roosevelt to yeidl Stalin "right to establish friendly governments" across Europe after war

(or Roosevelt evil? Communsit? idiot? all of the above? should read up on him more...)


	 ...Part of Zarubin’s original brief from
	the  Centre  had  been  to  recruit  agents  from  among  the
	large German-American community who could be used
	against Germany. In the end he recruited not a single one.
	When asked to explain this omission, he told the Centre
	that  most  German-Americans  were  Jews  and  therefore
	unsuitable.


does Andrews actually believe this?


	 ...In taking that momentous decision in the
	middle of the battle of Stalingrad, the main turning point
	in the war on the eastern front, Stalin was not thinking of
	the needs of the Great Patriotic War, since it was clear
	that the bomb could not be ready in time to assist in the
	defeat  of  Germany.  Instead,  he  was  already  looking
	forward to a post-war world in which, since the United
	States  and  Britain  would  have  nuclear  weapons,  the
	Soviet Union must have them too.


that's a good point

I guess they'd think of it like a "never again" thing

Oppenheimer I guess figured something like WWII with Germany invading Poland or invading Russia wouldn't happen since they'd be armed with nukes

would people actually believe that giving Russia nuclear secrets would help the war effort? they'd have to believe that the bomb would be finished before end of the war

they'd also have to believe the bomb wouldn't just end up in Nazi hands anyway from Nazi espionage


	...The most valuable,
	in the Centre’s view, were those on “the construction of
	uranium piles.” At least two other scientists, codenamed
	MOOR  and  KELLY,  also  provided  intelligence  on
	various aspects of TUBE ALLOYS, the British atomic
	project.


OH MY GOD THEY HAVE ALLUMINUM TUBES

was that a reference?


	...Fuchs  was  a  committed  Stalinist
who was later to take part in the construction of the first
atomic bomb. Before the war he had been an enthusiastic
participant in dramatized readings of the transcripts of the
show  trials  organized  by  the  Society  for  Cultural
Relations  with  the  Soviet  Union,  and  impressed  his
research supervisor, the future Nobel Laureate Sir Neville
Mott, with the passion with which he played the part of
the prosecutor Vyshinsky, “accusing the defendants with
a cold venom that I would never have suspected from so
quiet  and  retiring  a  young  man.”  Late  in  1941,  Fuchs
asked the leader of the German Communist Party (KPD)
underground  in  Britain,  Jürgen  Kuczynski,  for  help  in
passing  to  the  Russians  what  he  had  learned  while


Andrews says Fuchs a Stalinist and a good actor, especially when playing a part that requires "cold venom"


	 ...Among those who supplied some of the further
	intelligence requested by Kurchatov was MAR, who in
	October  1943  was  transferred  to  the  Du  Pont  plant  in
	Hanford,  Washington  State,  which  produced  plutonium
	for the MANHATTAN project. He told his controller that
	his aim was to defeat the “criminal” attempt of the US
	military to conceal the construction of an atomic bomb
	from the USSR.
	103
	 Other sources of atomic intelligence
	included  a  “progressive  professor”  in  the  radiation
	laboratory at Berkeley, California,
	104
	 and—probably—a
	scientist  in  the  MANHATTAN  project’s  metallurgical
	laboratory  at  Chicago  University.
	105



around this section Andrews mentions a lot more spies than were caught

MAR says US military hiding bomb from USSR "criminal"

what about building it in the first place? Oppeneheimer more or less agreed with MAR, but when people had doubts about the bomb told them to press on...


	... There is, however, no reliable
	evidence that Soviet intelligence yet had an agent inside
	Los Alamos. 107


or is there??


	...The  penetration  of  the  MANHATTAN  project  was
	only  the  most  spectacular  part  of  a  vast  wartime
	expansion  of  Soviet  scientific  and  technological
	espionage. S&T from the United States and Britain made
	a major contribution to the development of Soviet radar,
	radio  technology,  submarines,  jet  engines,  aircraft  and
	synthetic rubber, as well as nuclear weapons.
	108
	 Atomic
	intelligence was codenamed ENORMOZ (“Enormous”),
	jet  propulsion  VOZDUKH  (“Air”),  radar  RADUGA
	(“Rainbow”). 
	109


I guess they prefer to use scientists in other countries to make their weapons


pg 334 https://ia801603.us.archive.org/14/items/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB.pdf

Stalin and others worried about massive british plot against USSR

70 years too late?


pg 341

Andrews spends some time going over how nobody liked Zarubin and he was bad at his job and being secret

The Nelson bug had some signs of being a conduit for misinformation to FBI

they had Zarubin go meeting Nelson at his house (missed it first time for some reason) and then all this incriminating shit was revealed to FBI by it

then Harry Hopkins gives a "friendly warning"

maybe "friendly warning" to Zarubin?


	...Though Zarubin became somewhat more discreet after
	this “friendly warning,” his cover had been blown. Worse
	was yet to come. Four months later Zarubin was secretly
	denounced to the FBI by Vasili Mironov, a senior officer
	in  the  New  York  residency  who  had  earlier  appealed
	unsuccessfully to the Centre for Zarubin’s recall.
	5
	 In an
	extraordinary anonymous letter to Hoover on August 7,
	1943, Mironov identified Zarubin and ten other leading
	members of residencies operating under diplomatic cover
	in  the  United  States,  himself  included,  as  Soviet
	intelligence officers. He also revealed that Browder was
	closely involved with Soviet espionage and identified the
	Hollywood producer Boris Morros (FROST) as a Soviet
	agent.  Mironov’s  motives  derived  partly  from  personal
	loathing for Zarubin himself. He told Hoover, speaking of
	himself  in  the  third  person,  that  Zarubin  and  Mironov
	“both  hate  each  other.”  Mironov  also  appears  to  have
	been  tortured  by  a  sense  of  guilt  for  his  part  in  the
	NKVD’s massacre of the Polish officer corps in 1940.
	Zarubin, he told Hoover, “interrogated and shot Poles in
	Kozelsk,  Mironov  in  Starobelsk.”  (In  reality,  though
	Zarubin did interrogate some of the Polish officers, he
	does not appear to have been directly involved in their
	execution.) But there are also clear signs in Mironov’s
	letter,  if  not  of  mental  illness,  at  least  of  the  paranoid
	mindset generated by the Terror. He accused Zarubin of
	being  a  Japanese  agent  and  his  wife  of  working  for
	Germany,  and  concluded  bizarrely:  “If  you  prove  to
	Mironov that Z is working for the Germans and Japanese,
	he will immediately shoot him without a trial, as he too
	holds a very high post in the NKVD.”


ends up getting outed along with some other people in weird letter to Hoover too

worth checking if any patterns with those other people


I think something like this happened in Russian revolution? Like if Bolsheviks weren't performing well they'd be turned over to Okhrana or could also be outed as Okhrana spies

I think it was the guy in charge of Pravda at one point, not sure



pg 535


	...On February 5,  1944 Fuchs had  his first meeting  in
	New York’s East Side with his NKGB controller, Harry
	Gold (codenamed successively GOOSE and ARNO), an
	industrial  chemist  born  in  Switzerland  of  Russian
	parents.
	37
	 Fuchs was told to identify himself by carrying a
	tennis ball in his hand and to look for a man wearing one
	pair  of  gloves  and  carrying  another.
	38
	  Gold,  who
	introduced  himself  as  “Raymond,”  reported  to  Leonid
	Kvasnikov, head of S&T at the New York residency (later
	known as Line X), that Fuchs had “greeted him pleasantly
	but was rather cautious at first.”
	39
	 Fuchs later claimed,
	after his arrest in 1949, that during their meetings “the
	attitude of ‘Raymond’ was at all times that of an inferior.”
	Gold admitted, after his own arrest by the FBI, that he
	was  overawed  by  the  extraordinary  intelligence  which
	Fuchs provided and had found the idea of an atomic bomb
	“so frightening that the only thing I could do was shove it
	away as far back in my mind as I could and simply not
	think on the matter at all.”


A snub at Gold?

I think they don't like Gold


	...The New York residency also reported in November
	1944  that  the  precociously  brilliant  nineteen-year-old
	Harvard  physicist  Theodore  Alvin  (“Ted”)  Hall,  then
	working at Los Alamos, had indicated his willingness to
	collaborate. As well as being inspired by the myth-image
	of the Soviet worker-peasant state, which was an article of
	faith for most ideological Soviet agents, Hall convinced
	himself  that  an  American  nuclear  monopoly  would
	threaten  the  peace  of  the  post-war  world.  Passing  the
	secrets  of  the  MANHATTAN  project  to  Moscow  was
	thus  a  way  “to  help  the  world,”  as  well  as  the  Soviet
	Union. As the youngest of the atom spies, Hall was given
	the  appropriate,  if  transparent,  codename  MLAD
	(“Young”).  Though  only  one  year  older,  the  fellow
	Harvard student who first brought Hall into contact with
	the  NKGB,  Saville  Savoy  Sax,  was  codenamed  STAR
	(“Old”).
	47
	 Hall himself went on to become probably the
	youngest major spy of the twentieth century.


young and naive spy Ted Hall said to have been inspired by image of worker-peasant state and that U.S. nuclear monopoly would threaten post-war peace of the world. Thought he was "helping the world" by working on atomic bombs and giving them to dangerous madmen.

	
	...	 The
	Centre,  however,  found  it  difficult  to  believe  that
	espionage  in  the  United  States  could  really  be  as
	straightforward as it seemed. During 1944-5 the NKGB
	grew  increasingly  concerned  about  the  security  of  its
	American  operations  and  sought  to  bring  them  under
	more  direct  control.
	49
	  Among  its  chief  anxieties  was
	Elizabeth Bentley’s habit of socializing with the agents
	for whom she acted as courier. When Bentley’s controller
	and lover, Jacob Golos, died from a sudden heart attack
	on  Thanksgiving  Day  1943,  Akhmerov  decided  to
	dispense  with  a  cut-out  and  act  as  her  new  controller.
	Bentley’s  first  impressions  were  of  a  smartly  dressed
	“jaunty-looking  man  in  his  mid-thirties”  with  an
	expansive  manner.  (Akhmerov  was  actually  fortytwo).
	She soon realized, however, that “despite the superficial
	appearance of a boulevardier, he was a tough character.”
	50
	For the next six months, though Bentley continued to act
	as courier for the Silvermaster group in Washington, she
	felt herself under increasing pressure.


http://spartacus-educational.com/Jacob_Golos.htm
	Jacob Golos met Elizabeth Bentley for the first time on 15th October, 1938. Kathryn S. Olmsted described their first meeting in her book, Red Spy Queen (2002) with the spy who told her his name was Timmy: "Like any good spy, Golos did not stand out in a crowd. A heavy-set, rather nondescript man in a bad suit and scuffed shoes, he did not make a favorable first impression on Elizabeth. At five feet two inches, he was seven inches shorter than the strapping young woman he hoped to use as a source. She eyed with disapproval his tattered felt hat and shabby car." However, she gradually changed her mind about Golos: "He seemed intelligent and thoughtful. Soon she found herself telling him the story of her life, including her disappointing earlier contacts with the Soviet underground. As she warmed to him, Timmy seemed to grow better looking. He was no longer short and squat but 'powerfully built'; he was not colorless but had 'startlingly blue' eyes that stared straight into hers... Though she was intimidated, she felt flattered by the attention that this powerful Communist was giving her." (6) 


Bentley working a con and they didn't like it


https://ia801603.us.archive.org/14/items/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB.pdf
	...	Roosevelt and Churchill left Yalta with no sense that
	they  had  been  deceived  about  Stalin’s  true  intentions.
	Even Churchill, hitherto more skeptical than Roosevelt,
	wrote confidently, “Poor Neville Chamberlain believed he
	could trust Hitler. He was wrong. But I don’t think I’m
	wrong about Stalin.”
	80
	 Some sense of how Moscow felt
	that good intelligence had contributed to Stalin’s success
	at  Yalta


hehe

"good intelligence"


	...Stalin  knew  the
	contents of many highly classified British and American
	documents which Churchill and Roosevelt kept even from
	most of their cabinets. ULTRA, though revealed to only
	six British ministers, was known to Stalin. So was the
	MANHATTAN  project,  which  was  carefully  concealed
	from  Vice-President  Harry  Truman  until  he  succeeded
	Roosevelt in April 1945. (Truman was then also informed
	of ULTRA for the first time.)
	30
	 There is a peculiar irony
	about  Truman’s  decision  at  the  Potsdam  conference  in
	July 1945 to reveal to Stalin that “we had a new weapon
	of  unusual  destructive  power.”
	31
	  Stalin  seemed
	unimpressed by the news—as well he might, since he had
	known about plans to build the American atomic bomb
	for fifteen times as long as Truman.


-----


should read Gold's testimony since they showed strong dislike for him and his testimony was kept under wraps for awhile



------


