

what can be said about this group, that is the subject of our study?


they especially want to recruit people with sociopathic tendencies

they have a certain ideology, which I think is shared by their topmost members in charge of their planning and decisionmaking, and maybe those in charge of crafting ideologies to spread to various groups across the rest of the world


they exisitence of such a core group can be inferred by their actions:

- the protocols of the elders of zion was forged by elements in the tsarist secret police, which layed out a plan to conquer the world using war, deceit, communism

- Lenin spoke of the need to use the war to foment global revolution

- Likewise, he spoke of Engels "prophetic words" in the necessity of a global war to bring about the class struggle

- The techniques outlined in the protocols have been in use through history and are in use today

- The Tanaka memorial, likewise forged by them, laid out a plan for the conquest of Manchuria that was executed

- Golitsyn spoke of a core group of Soviet planners, although he is unreliable (his writing off the Sino-Soviet split as a big deception operation doesn't sound right; it looks like Mao wasn't in on the plot and actually did start to distrust the Soviets, and his "advisors" had to manage that.)

- Bezmenov recognized a strategy of global subversion from his experiences at Novosti

- Many of their actions suggest forethought--sykes-picot eased divide and conquer of the middle east, the treaty at Versailles led directly to world war II, Fermi delayed the discovery of fission until then, and Szilard kicked off the race for the bomb shortly before the start of the war


there is a pattern where unusual decisions made by leaders or egged on by suspicious advisors and generals across countries work together in a way that ends with them getting more power

while "Nikki" and "Willi" were trying to avoid a war, their advisors were egging them on and saying they have to mobilize before the other does

Tanaka decided to break from Japanese leadership and Navy and invade Manchuria on his own; later the Soviets took Manchuria while the japanese army left behind arms which aided the Chinese communists in the civil war. George Marshall in China negotiaed a cease-fire that helped the communists regroup and win the civil war.

Stalin took a hit to his public perception and good-will toward the Soviets for the Stalin-Hitler pact. At the same time, world leaders called for "appeasement" for which their were later ridiculed but more or less forgiven while Hitler took Europe (initially) peice-by-peice. During this, Stalin built up Soviet military and industry. Later Hitler made the mistake of invading Russia while the allies were still strong, and even then made fatal mistakes apparently under the influence of "advisers" like Alfred Rosenberg. Because of this, Soviets under the command of Stalin were able to take Europe and be greeted as liberators instead of conquerers.

some politicians in Western countries helped the Bolsheviks grab power and later probably helped them win the civil war. The allies pressured Kerensky to push after taking control of the provisional government, the U.S. and British invasion was half-hearted but enough to inflame anti-imperialist sentiment, Ludendorff under the influence of Aufbau helped divide the Whites between two princes

same pattern seen in "ideological" war:

the HUAC would start investigations that tracked what the FBI was doing, and shift focus to uncovering "communists" from uncovering foreign espionage agents. HUAC would sometimes question communist party members on what they told the FBI. In "operation abolition," they made it look like they were using fear of Communism to keep their jobs with no apparent gain to themselves but gain for the communists to use them as a prop. With the information they had, they could have done a much better job explaining soviet espionage to the public (known in hindsight now), but they ended up persecuting people for their political beleifs instead or appearing that way.

Nazis were obsessed with communists and grew out of fear of inflitatrion and subversion by "Jewish Bolshevism." They ended up being outspoken opponents of Communism while at the same time becoming the poster-child for evil. Everyone wanted them gone, and I think it played out across Europe and even in the Manhattan project that "anti-fascism" became equated with Communism, which was exploited in a way to warm people to Communism.

During the cold war, I think there was a pattern that those who rose to the forefront of opposition to Communist revolutions turned out evil, suspiciously incompetent pointing toward treason? Chaing Kai Shek oversaw bloody purges of Communists and I think made some weird military blunders (need to look up again). People around him wanted to replace him. Diem and especially his brother Nhu in Vietnam decided to attack Bhuddists and purge them and basically commit suicide while communists were closing in. Some Soviet agents were involved in the attack on Bhuddists. In both cases opponents to Communists came off just as bad or worse than Communists.

I think elements in British empire and other imperialist powers helped accelerate the end of their empires and rise of Soviets? only saw hints of that worth looking into more 


but the point is there is an international group, who work in concert for them to grab power, and apparently they believe something different from what they profess to believe

and this group is perfectly evil: when they grab power, it's followed by genocide in Germany, Cambodia, mass starvation in Ukraine and China, terror, slaughter, and opression in Russia and around the world. They work very hard to take over a country only to slaughter and enslave its inhabitants.

Communism and totalitarianism in general makes it possible to carry out mass starvation, terror, and genocide, and this allowance wasn't spared


what is the thinking of this core group? it also has to be inferred


the protocols of zion laid out a worldview as well as planning, techniques and strategy

the dialouges from hell that it "plagarized" was a philosophical document


the main thrust of dialouges was that Machiavelli was right and Montesquieu was wrong

I guess they like Machiavelli...

maybe stronger in that is a dislike of Montesquieu. This shows up in the protocols too, where they speak of freedom and rights as folly and claim "liberty" is nothing more than a tool for them to conquer.

some apparent members show this disposition:

Fenby spoke with relish on the assassination of Song Jiaoren and the blighting of hopes for democracy in China. Contemporary with Song's assination were tsarist police plots to split Mongolia and China and apparently to divide and conquer China itself in the "warlord era" (later Soviet agents would offer communism as a solution to "warlordism," and communism would be spread building off anarchism already fomented by agents under the tsar)

certain propagandists in Russia and China disparage democracy and call for "managed democracy"

Lenin and the Bolsheviks mocked the concept of "rights" with a demonstration--calling for democracy and rights in the army led to the army's collapse and the Bolsheviks ascension to power (I guess their point was those who call for rights are hypocritical, since rights and active military service don't mix)

communists would make a mockery of and twist the concept of rights toward their ends--the "right" to distributed wealth or the wealth of others was used to motivate people to revolution. In general they'd twist the concept of rights toward selfishness and material things and away from right to liberty and respecting that for others.

Pompeo spoke that those in foreign countries have no rights, I think playing on apparent hypocrisy in Americans respecting rights for themselves but not others. A lot of their active measures center on legal rights for immigrants too which brings forth this quandry.

HLI guy, at least knowledgable in their activities, took as true "there is no law but the law of the jungle" (relates to rights and liberalism, law seen as a way to ensure rights for all)

the concept of rights in the U.S. at least has been politicized with help from their agents--right to bear arms a good example. Right tends toward seeing unrestricted industry as a right, left toward social security as a right.

Trump and the agents supporting him made a mockery of rights and dragged a lot of people with it. Registry for Muslims a good example, flying in the face of right to religious liberty. Propagandists like Horowitz demonstrate relish in arguing terrorist groups like ISIS are "simply following Islam literally," I guess enjoying what they see as frustrating a weakness in the mind of those who dogmatically believe  right to freedom of religion (if not true for Islam, you can imagine a "religion" that blurs the line between a faith and a violent subversive group, e.g. make up a religion where killing innocent people is a religious ritual. I guess they'd see this as a reason to look down on people who believe in religious liberty. They also tend to look down on religious people in general which I guess could play into that).

They tend to promote tyrants and create cults of personality around them like Mao, Lenin, Hitler, Napolean (apparently), and arguably Trump. The first four ruined hopes for democracy in the countries where they took power. Cults of personality tend to squash liberty and individualism--people look to a leader to make decisions instead of themselves.

America is a famous country for basing its society and country on the concepts of liberty and rights, and groups of their agents like the KGB have designated America the "main enemy." Their propaganda today twists the words of America's founders for the right, and especially disparages America's founders as hypocritical racists in the left. This line of narrative can be traced back to elements in the British empire.

The United States was founded in a violent overthrow and strong ideological repudiation of tyrants, and some of America's founders have said "the tree of liberty must be watered time by time with the blood of tyrants." This probably angered tyrants.


I guess can say they, at least this "core group" dislike rights and liberty. A lot of their work goes toward erasing or twisting this idea in the minds of the public at large, and their agents show a disdain for it. Their work shows that they think about quandries in the concept of rights and their application in law and exploit these. Their disposition suggests they decided rights are folly as laid out in "protocols" document. 


what else can be said about their philosophy?

some philosophers in their ranks apparently, but this doesn't mean they believe that philosophy. Evola appears to be one of them but what he says is gibberish and he probably knew it. Often philosophy is a tool for them--mysticism and I guess some evola bullshit behind fascism, dialectical materialism behind communism, Rand's objectivism behind libertarianism (I think?). I think they had different philosophies to justify imperialism (like Kipling's poem), different forms of racism (the wierd mysitc stuff that Moltke believed in interesting), anarchism, nationalism, realpolitik, basically any ideological weapon they use is associated with some "philosopher" usually.

I guess they'd tend to regard a philosophy they spread to use as a tool with mockery? They tend to look down on people they con and laugh at them for falling for it. Like I think they hated Communists. So figure it would help to separate philosophies they use as a tool and what they might actually believe. Although philosophies they use as a recruiting tool could be something they actually believe, since if they use it for recruiting their members would believe it, at least at first. They have different philosophies that have been used for recruiting (objectivism among Western businessmen, internationalist maximalism as described by Lenin, whatever Jogalaker and Warmflash believe I guess) but some have commonalities, like the lack of morality in the three mentioned.


maybe Andrew drops a hint at what they believe:


https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB_djvu.txt
    It is easy to see why Djilas’s devastating expose of the 
    Soviet system as a co-optive oligarchy run by a privileged 
    Party nomenklatura should have been seen as so 
    subversive. In 1963 the twenty-year-old Russian dissident 
    Vladimir Bukovsky was sent to psychiatric hospital for 
    possessing a copy of it. Even for KGB officers The New 
    Class was seen as a potentially dangerous text. When 
    General Oleg Kalugin finally read the book in the KGB 
    library in 1981, twenty- four years after its publication in 
    the West, he found himself secretly agreeing with it.^^ 
    Why Nietzsche should have been mentioned in the same 
    breath as Djilas is more puzzling. His call for a 
    “revaluation of all values” so that the life force of the 
    strongest should not be hampered by the weak, though 
    bearing some relation to the actual practice of Stalinism, 
    was ideological anathema.


the protocols of the elders of zion is kindof a big hint...

I think I've seen other slips like Andrew's?

Lenin and "for us it is a matter of expediency," end justifies the means in "communist ethics" and end is always "all power to the Soviets"

their attitude and what they spend their time doing is kindof a big hint

HLI guy with his "law of the jungle" thing

HLI guy also mentioned three groups of them who believe in different things, maybe they're not all in agreement? can't exactly trust this guy but what he said sort-of made sense


here's what he said:

https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/80632307/
    >Can you give us an overview of the different factions? 

    The major power factions in the world are analogous to dark priests, good priests, kings, and (in theory) meritocracies.

    Dark priests - these people believe that beauty emerges from contrast. Evil is necessary for good kind of thing. They are not necessarily pro-evil, but pro-contrast.

    Kings - generally less intelligent than dark priests. Much of their code of behavior derives from a belief in the past that you need a slave class to sustain an enlightened class.

    Meritocracy - they believe in something similar to democratic rule, but only with votes for the initiated, because the masses are hopeless.

    Us - we're more interested in the emperor without clothes effect. The exercise of power has always come with a stifling of dissent and dangerous dips into psychosis. We try to undermine this tendency more than anything else. 


so it was actually 4 groups

later says Obama a "dark priest," makes sense I guess with him saying he was "heartened" by the left-wing protests ignited by Trump after letting Trump get installed

if the HUAC actually believed in Communism (apparently Obama was a true believer), would be "dark priests" as described by HLI guy

HLI guy says these are smart but Obama came off as a dupe, at same time HLI guy doesn't always speak straight

Kings sound like Machiavelli fans or philosophy outlined in protocols.

Meritocracy is like that but refined I guess?

"us" are supposedly trying to counter cults of personality, not really sure have to read him again (he did say "We want you to embrace reason, not a personality. Personalities are tools for the dimwitted. ")

he also apparently believes in advanced ancient civilizations... (to be fair could be fucking with us, Romans built roads and Egyptians built Pyramids, but some civs after them couldn't)

came off as sharp guy though

other HLI guy quotes:

    "We don't assess society as capable of open rational discussion."

    "We estimate that people are almost infinitely malleable. There is no reason to consider them permanently dimwitted and plenty of reason to expect improvement from them. "

    "The grasp of history is pitiful and the importance almost impossible to overstate."

    ">Who teaches or reveals or instructs your group's "curriculum"? What is the information you have, and how would we go about learning it?

    Often it is passed through families, but not exclusively by any means."

    "The USA is our project to a large extent. "


on "emporer has no clothes:"

    >>80636487
    Consider the tale of the emperor who has no clothes.

    When everyone fails to point out that the emperor is naked, new generations arise that can no longer distinguish between the states of being clothed or naked.

    You've reached a point where even your leaders don't know what they are doing anymore.

    We are here to bring you back to sanity.


reminiscent of problems with exalting evil or very flawed people to hero status in various countries. Harder to reason about atomic espionage since Oppenheimer, Fermi, Bohr exalted, can watch them exploit that. Harder to show people what Okhrana did to China in the name of Mao since Mao exalted. These personalities help hide history or even muck up ideas: Trump seen as usurper hero guy to some, and now they can't figure how human rights work.


my favorite:

    >You speak of blackmail webs. How does one avoid them?

    Often, if you seek power, you will be framed even if you do not engage in blackmail worthy behavior.

    If this doesn't work and you are sufficiently threatening, you will be executed.

    If you want to exercise power in the world, you must abide by reality, and therefore the law of the jungle. If you can't wave a big stick, don't threaten a big animal.


and "All of these things are setup with multiple levels of explanation, in part to control opposition. It's only necessary that you partially accept one to go quietly. You become dangerous when you see through them all. "

second favorite:

    >How is your group organized/orchestrated/able to affect change?

    We primarily use the power of ideas, but not always. Our organization is primarily vested in the preservation of knowledge and forum for discussion that might not go over well in public.



...



    Brexit is loading the barrel for another financial crisis. You always want a loaded gun even if you don't pull the trigger.


this says a lot? figured they were holding pandemics, nuclear war, as blackmail or coercion against groups opposed to them


    >>80634237
    Putting yourself in /pol/'s shoes, are you the bad guys, or the good guys? 

    >>80634407
    We are on your side, but not everyone is. 

    >>80634800
    Why exactly do you need us, then? If your "group" some high tier secret society shit can't alone win this "war" I question how powerful and capable you guys really are if you're relying on some shitposters for the vanguard.

    P.S. Are you the Thule guy? 

    >>80635172
    We don't need you. We want you. 

    >>80635637
    Why? 

    >>80635750
    Self-interest. It's not a zero sum world. 


apparently HLI guy's faction wants to recruit people and doesn't think its a zero-sum world (some think otherwise? I remember seeing people argue that in repudiation of the "arrow of time" concept)

why was he doing recruiting stuff on /pol/? I think a lot of their propagandists were there... did he know that?


    Your regime is increasingly concerned with its inability to control you, and they are right to be. 


I think can point to evidence of this. After Venona and Mitrokhin archives released (maybe can add Sudoplatov's and other memiors to this), agentura in media across the world had egg on their face. With Trump and these failed anti-MSM "nationalist" uprisings around the world they bought themselves a bit more support by the reaction to these movements, but this is shaky and fleeting. 


    >>80634625
    Then maybe give us something substantial and we'll go from there. This has only been going on a little over a week and even normies had no fucking clue the Clinton Foundation ever existed until 3ish days ago.

    You're contradicting yourself if you're saying the LOL EVIL line is fed to us while what the Clintons did was largely a money laundering/power scheme, which technically is evil to all of us shitheads who can't even get an internship.

    Are you on their side?

    What use are you to us if the best you have are cryptic responses to dig deeper? 

    >>80635046
    Look at the Bush/Clinton cocaine dealing.

    At first you think, aha, pure evil.

    When you learn more, you see that much of the profit was laundered into Russia to topple the USSR.

    Now you have people who laud Reagan and the collapse of the USSR, but hate the Clintons very confused - the Clintons had more to do with USSR collapse than Reagan ever did.

    But, you all agree that the American public reaped no peace dividend from this - so was it an accomplishment after all?

    You have to peel back many layers here, not just surface cons. 


"aha pure evil," but then says has a purpose--this comes up a lot when trying to figure out what they were doing. WWI for example, from watching them deliberately starting a war easy to conclude they are just pure assholes, but it turns out it had a purpose for spreading communism, so it was a thought-out plan and could say evil and all the death was just a byproduct. Even for starvation they claim they had a plan.

On the other hand, WWI didn't get socialism anywhere but Russia, plan didn't work. They tend to have a lot of plans that don't work but do end up killing a lot of people...

is he right about the cocaine thing? worth checking


    >>80634382
    You need both new tactics and new abstractions.

    Most of what I see here is "LOL EVIL" but if you step back and think for a moment surely you will come to the conclusion that you've been fed this line by nefarious actors that don't want you to see the big pictures.

    I'm not saying you'll arrive at a less condemning conclusion either. 


...


    >>80633735
    Sanders is fatally flawed in the sense that much of what you guys do is. You can only get so far by asking for things; taking them is the way of the real world.


"taking things is the real way of the world"--why is this familiar?


    >>80632760
    The lesson you should take from events like Seth Rich is that good intent is worthless without good plans.

    You guys do a good job of questioning what you are told in a detail oriented fashion, but not in the abstract.

    You need to emerge from your indoctrination into the real world and appreciate principles of reality such as the law of the jungle.


I guess in their world people are pulling plots and grabbing power all the time, while the rest of the world doesn't see it. I think there's a tendency to see Machiavellianism as the truth and ideas to the contrary as hopelessly naive because of this.


another: https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/80653445/

    >>80653644
    >only a matter of time

    I think I cited a major solar storm before? There are major catastrophic event drivers that happen on a regular basis. New diseases, etc.

    We as a species don't really deal with outlier event possibilities, even if they are practically guaranteed over ~100 year horizons. 

    ...>>80654642
    There are a lot of potential catastrophes and very little is mitigated. We're very concerned about the wanton disregard for rational planning. 


can read into this? ideology in protocols was elitist, saying masses don't know what's best for themselves, but they do. 


    >>80654146
    >Are you doing the right thing in your opinion? 

    Honestly not certain. But doubt is probably a good thing.


part of why I like this guy

he talked about different factions, and can see things pointing to that too--Black September was a set-up for a wider war, but that didn't happen, and Nasser patched things up with the PLO only to die the next day

Bourtsev consistently frusterated their plots, from Russian Revolution to protocols at Berne court, whatever he knew

General Popovkin gave them hell with phobos grunt


even if they have a single plan, it would make sense for factions to develop along the way. Like it be natural for people involved in the plots to look back and say "what the fuck were we doing" and reconsider, oppose further plots that are similar. Could imagine people looking at how Black September was going, remembering WWI and being like "that again? really?" Blowing up rockets and sabotaging space exploration would get people suspicious too for obvious reasons.


    How do you communicate with each other in the age of mass surveillance?

    Who controls the surveillance networks, in terms of your "factions" model? 

    >>80659509
    No surveillance technology is particularly sophisticated. Have you ever spoken something that meant one thing to a broader group, but another to a particular peer because of an inside communication history?

    Highly intelligent individuals are highly adept at this, so we can speak volumes without you even knowing the conversation exists. 


some of the back-and-forth in the media points to this. I think that happened around the time of the decision for the h-bomb too.

What's the most secure way to communicate? Venona shows not even a one-time pad can be trusted, and secretly communicating like that raises suspicion and legal problems anyway.


    >>80660032
    So, essentially a form of Universal Basic Income where property ownership and the ability to create, innovate, and sell our goods remains intact?

    It sounds as if you goobers realize the way to a protopian society that doesn't stagnate and continues into an unlimited future. I'm glad you all have the right idea about the future, if I'm not mistaken. 


    >>80661093
    Sort of, but we don't base this concept on a "right" to a certain set of goods or view it as a redistribution scheme.


sensitive to allegations of communist thinking?


    When will women be allowed in your ranks as equals? 

    >>80661184
    They already are. They tend to deviate from the norm less than men, and we're hardly an ordinary bunch - so they are markedly underrepresented.


reminds me of Warmflash and Jogolekar, thought not as strong and annoying the way he puts it


    >>80661251

    If that's the case, why shouldn't everyone live as hedonistically as possible? 

    >>80661565
    It isn't in your self-interest.


"rational self-interest" type?

he doesn't say "because it's immoral" which is I guess what most people would say. I think there are a lot of ideologies that assume self-interest as a goal that would be attractive to these people.


    >>80665141
    Seek your power and your most important answers quietly. You don't need me if you've made it that far though.


and then they hack your computer and read over your shoulder at the library...


    >>80665286
    You have another financial crisis coming in the near future. There will be an intense war of ideas with respect to how to reshape society with lasting consequences that plays out as a result.

    ...>>80665731
    Are you talking about blackmailing people? 

    >>80665898
    That's an option, but that is how your current regime works. Do you want something better, or new boss meet old boss?


does he see his faction as reformers? in other posts he talks about technology, certain reforms can make people's lives better


https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/80667192/

says he was inducted into this "secret society" as a young child


    >>80667192
    any books you recommend? 

    >>80667883
    The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind

    TL;DR all traces of consciousness disappeared for a period of time *after* civilization emerged (although you won't find that in this book, because it follows the traditional historical myth of a singular rise of civilization rather than rise, collapse, and rise again) 


if this guy legit, not bullshitting, and want to figure out their philosophy, this is pretty useful...

I guess he's not warm to the "arrow of time" idea

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_Jaynes not really sure what's going on with this

book was popular seems trippy

like he said says humans learned conciousness instead of evolved it (maybe some of these guys hope the masses can unlearn conciousness? protocols say they don't like people with initiative)


    >>80668454
    Are us regular folk considered cattle by the elites? 

    >>80668710
    By some factions, yes. 


says some factions see masses as cattle, his apparently sees potential in people, or at least he keeps saying that


    >>80668454
    >>80668531
    >>80668612
    Why do you think the Clintons are "evil" or "wrong"? Why do you not support them? 

    >>80668741
    They seek power as sociopaths, not as a means to an end. 


I guess another difference between his faction and others? power as means to and end and not the end itself


    So as far as I get it your true goal is to try and preserve (or maybe even advance) civilization, sanity and enlightment so we can avoid or at least soften the cyclical periods of collapse and literal madness orgies that have repeatedly happen trough the true history because we are slowly approaching the point of no return for the next one? 

    >>80671620
    Very good description 


wants to stop humanity from destroying themselves? I guess see most of humanity as self-destructive, like sheep who need shepherds (and they fancy themselves the shepherds)


    >>80672199
    We don't view Trump or Hillary as materially different, but others will initiate a financial crisis after he takes office to destroy the credibility of populism and nationalism, which runs counter to their agendas.

    We view Trump as woefully unprepared for this eventuality. 


says some in "secret society" want to trash populism and nationalism via Trump

I had it figured their propagandists were trying to cover their ass, the way he puts it makes it sound more refined.

I guess the expected overreaction to Trump is "trust the establishment," which would be nice for the establishment.

thinks about big plots to change peoples ideas


    >>80673098
    He has spoken to this possibility in public.

    As to them being materially the same, it's true that some foster increased immigration as a means to undercutting your country and Trump opposes this. These are very trivial concerns in the big picture though. If you had a strong culture, you wouldn't be in jeopardy from such an attack. In other words, you are chasing symptoms and not problems. Distracted. 


views Trump working due to weakness in U.S. culture (I mean he's not wrong...)

type of guy to analyze cultures for "weakness," I guess


    >>80673564
    Only one before this has left any trace. No one has any recorded history. It's largely speculative. 


he comes off as really believing his ancient civilizations thing but says its largely speculative


    ...>>80673589
    Do you have any real allies among scientists and educators or are they just blind followers?

    >>80674199
    Most of us have roles like this, and we influence others who do as well. 


says most of his secret society members are scientists, educators, "roles like this" (politicians? journalists?)


in reply to "red team planner" post saying U.S. gov would be fucked in a civil war and is afraid of it:

    >>80675192
    Anon is correct. Your masters are largely impotent without your tacit consent.


not sure what he's getting at here? they'd have just as much or more power in a civil war, if Bolshevik revolution says anything. They'd have a lot of people following their orders, unless they don't have enough support to do that anymore.


https://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/80676272/

    >>80676617
    There is a need for some sense of forward momentum to maintain confidence.

    As I have already pointed out, the system is very vulnerable to insurgents.

    Think about the power of the idea of an inevitable march to world order. See what I mean, right? 


a dig at the arrow of time? not sure what he's getting at


    >>80676727 >>80676944
    Give us a comment on ancient Egyptian/Babylonian mystery schools 

    >>80676636
    The originated from recognition that consciousness was lost and a goal to prevent that from happening again. Much broader scope of derivative activity today though.


this goes back to his idea of conciousness from "bicaramel mind" book. I guess he thinks people can lose conciousness and go back to blindly following their cheiftens or something and is trying to stop that (does he think someone is trying to make that happen?)

dunno why he would believe this. Richard dawkins commented on it and said its either genius or bullshit.

Maybe a better question: if someone tried to convince him of this, why?


    >>80676556

    Thoughts on the Fermi Paradox? 

    >>80676700
    Bad input assumptions. 


doesn't give merit to Fermi Paradox, different from e.g. Warmflash



    >>80677138
    in your last thread you mentioned that most things paranormal are bs, I was wondering if there's any truth to extraterrestrials communicating with world governments? If so, any chance of disclosure within the next 10 or 15 years? 

    >>80676819
    No. I've personally expended great effort on this question. It's an appealing explanation, but untrue.


says he looked a lot into aliens messing with governments but decided its untrue


    >>80676272
    What opinion does your group have on Evola and his work?  

    >>80677544
    We have more faith in your potential than he does. 


pointing to "faith in potential" of outsiders differentiating him from other "factions"


    >>80677397
    So how would you describe your ideal society? does it include the concept of democracy?, free market trade? or alternatives? 

    >>80677763
    We generally try to promote both order and individual agency, although these two are conflicting to some degree. It's a difficult balancing act and prudent action can change over time.


says his faction (or the secret society as a whole?) want to promote order and individual agency and balance these


    >>80679333
    You can enumerate the possibilities for growth:

    innovation, foreign plunder, domestic plunder

    Obviously on the first is viable in the long term. Is Xi up to the task? Possibly, and shows more inclination than his American counterparts these days. 


is this a statement of his values or his understanding of facts? I guess he's for innovation and growth since he talks a lot about human "potential"


    >>80679519
    Snowden is a CIA asset that was meant to put the NSA in check for taking down a variety of people, most prominently Petraeus.


does he believe this on its face or is he just trying not to give too much away? also says Obama "CIA project." Maybe "CIA" for him is codename for his secret society sometimes


     >>80680500
    Is climate change a real concern or is it just a meme? 

    >>80679933
    Greenhouse gases have some forcing effect, but the uncertainty in measuring it is on the order of the effect itself. We can engineer processes to reverse it for something on the order of $1/person/year. It's not an intractable or world threatening problem by any means. 


says global warming not a concern since they can fix it with super technology

I guess this goes with his belief that there is amazing technology out there that it is hidden from people

although if this is true, why put so much effort into keeping global warming going in the first place...



    >>80679664
    I sincerely believe in Constitutional values as a solution to the world's problems and want to push this in cultures that never had English common law tradition. Thus my idea that China needs free speech in order to have growth, which is clearly a tortured concept. Am I fetishizing? 

    >>80679982
    Free speech has never existed in any general sense. You can only test the existence or nonexistence at the extreme of dangerous speech, and that's never been widely available


asked about constitutional values to solve worlds problems says "free speech never existed in general"

I mean that's an interesting question to debate (what is free speech exactly?), but why react to the question this way?

there's a hint of someone giving him an argument that freedom of speech a silly idea and him buying it (like rights being folly thing above)


    Alright, I'll bite.

    What's your organizations view on Christianity? 

    >>80680756
    Symbolically, highly important.

    Literally? We lament the silliness. 


disdain for religion common theme in their ideas


    >>80681016

    So you appreciate the cultural benefits of it but don't actually believe in Christ and the lord? 

    >>80681377
    No, it's more than that. In some sense you might even call us 'christian' but it doesn't have anything to do with popular interpretations.


says they are kindof christian but in a secret way no-one knows about (this is confusing)



    >>80681000
    This world is really not so different than your experience in high school. Popularity waxes and wanes, as does wealth, belief in various agendas, etc.

    The difference is that the popularity contests decide the fate of billions rather than who gets laid. 


I guess he sees petty power struggles and looks down on this


    >>80681537
    Obama is more aligned with the NSA than the CIA. Snowden, Clintons are representative of the CIA. 


CIA more like KGB? at least the ones who keep talking to press...


    >>80682181
    We live in a very primitive society ruled by the law of the jungle. The most significant capital is weapon-based leverage.


like "all political power grows from the barrel of a gun"


    >>80683071
    What, in your opinion, is inherently wrong with free capitalist society? 

    >>80683354
    There are many problems, including but not limited to a lack of rational agents. 


what can be said about his ideology from this? shirked from endorsing Communism, but sees problems in capatlism and I guess wants to account for them. Maybe plays into his "humans are bad at long term planning what if there's a solar storm" idea in talk of "lack of rational agents"


    >>80683290
    Feelings and/or notion of the world enables to think from micro to both macro and micro (which also heightens micro). This happens from, say, watching a certain film. Is this sort of the path you are describing? Haven't a certain preset of the world that in a maximum-sense of seeing the world which in then turn increases awareness and intelligence? If so what environmental asset do you use to keep within this set of mind? 

    >>80683700
    None of us are perfect, but we have a good culture that we keep isolated to continually reinforce these principles.


did he reply to right post? I guess he's saying they keep their culture isolated and secret to keep it pure or something


    >>80676272
    Does philosophy matter to you? In general? 

    >>80683831
    High level mathematics will get you more 'philosophical' value than the works of self-described philosophers.

    But you could call us that if you define it sufficiently vaguely or broadly enough. 


"you could call us philosophers" but says will get more value out of math.

sounds kindof like a technocrat? maybe he's a scientist or engineer. He talks a lot about technology solving the worlds problems. clearly not all of them science/tech people so this would be his bias and not necessarily representative of the whole group


this guy mimics him but sounds different: http://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/81141212/


...



HLI guy:

thinks secret knowledge is passed through families in secret societies, this knowledge is true, and he's cool with this 


says there are factions in his society and hints that some don't value the rest of the people in world much, but his faction sees potential.


he says his group is here to undo some brainwashing and bring us "back to sanity", apparently by "power of ideas." He thinks about big plots for the purpose of changing peoples' worldview.


thinks free speech doesn't exist


he thinks society can't handle "open rational discussion," but his group is a forum of dicussion for ideas that public can't handle


he's very concerned about the possibility of a cataclysm wiping out humanity and apparently sees his group as correcting for that, maybe justifying its existence. "Very concerned about the wanton disregard for rational planning" among the rest of the world.


not worried about global warming since he thinks technology is so advanced they could reverse it for cheap


he's not sure if he's doing the right thing or not, apparently concerned about morality but often not thinking in moralistic terms


shows a negative disposition toward the "arrow of time" concept, bolstered in a belief that civilization cyclic, but thinks "it's not a zero sum world." He thinks society can change for the better.


he suggests his faction wants power for the sake of bettering and safeguarding society, while others want power for its own sake


"taking things is the real way of the world" and there's "no law but the law of the jungle"



he sounds like a high-level dupe

reason it like:

most of what this group has done over modern history has been horrible--wars, disease (probably), nuclear weapons, starvation, genocide, pollution, global warming

they know not everyone initiated in is going to agree with this, some are going to be disgusted

but they have a strat for this already, can see in how they operate: e.g. why would a totalitarian regime like the Okhrana keep founding revolutionary organizations? because they know there will be revolutionaries, and when they come they want to control them and give them stupid ideas. It's a catching-mit for any opposition that might grow. And with this strategy in play, all the "factions" in the Russian revolution ended up aiding whims of the same organization.

HLI guy sounds like he got initiated in their society and wants to fix the world, which would be a natural reaction for anyone who learns about them and sees how they fucked up the world. He sees his faction as opposed to the more selfish and destruction factions in his secret society. But then he believes some weird shit like "we are not concerned about global warming," which doesn't make sense at all--if they're not concerned, why do they put so much effort and (even more importantly) take so much risk to keep global warming going?

He comes off as having a lot of faith in technology and in believing in secret technology, which apparently has led him to not worry about certain problems as much as he should. E.g., maybe those weaponized diseases being developed in labs are a greater concern if there isn't actually some secret cure somewhere. This faith would predispose someone toward inaction on some pretty important issues.

Otherwise he comes off as still elitist, if less so, and values keeping what they know contained in certain circles (but not that much apparently since he did an AMA on 4chan about it), an idea that would preclude him and people who think like him from recruiting the popular support they'd probably need to stop the opposing factions from doing more damage to the world.

His worldview is well-meaning which is a relief that there are people like that but some of his other ideas come off like an ideological catching-mit to predispose well-meaning people in his secret society to inaction.


...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idea_of_progress
    In intellectual history, the Idea of Progress is the idea that advances in technology, science, and social organization can produce an improvement in the human condition. That is, people can become better in terms of quality of life (social progress) through economic development (modernization), and the application of science and technology (scientific progress). The assumption is that the process will happen once people apply their reason and skills, for it is not divinely foreordained. The role of the expert is to identify hindrances that slow or neutralize progress.


the idea of progress or "arrow of time" is an anethema to everything they do

hide and muddle history with lying historians, starting fights over historical topic so they layman can't tell which side is right and loses interest (origins of WWI a good example, reading Herwig can tell he was sensitive to some of the debates), doing the same in science starting debates over everything or ignoring ideas (like Fermi ignoring idea leading to fission), politicizing science especially social science, politicizing idea of human rights

need history especially to learn from past mistakes (e.g. englightenment people looked at history of tyranny to find system to beat it), but they make it a full time job just to learn what was actually going on in history

their whole effort from WWI to cold war was to bring back tyranny, roll back progress in agriculture to starvation, their whole effort with active measures is to get people thinking with their feelings instead of their head or turned off on all the interesting questions of the world and not think at all. All of this tends toward putting them in power over an apathetic mass

    
    ...A fierce opponent of the Idea of Progress was German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), who became the prophet of decadence, scorning the 'weakling's doctrines of optimism,' and in his diagnoses of the times undermining the pillars of modernism, including faith in progress, to allow the strong individual to stand with his radical value system above the plebeian masses. An important part of his radically critical thinking consists of the attempt to use the classical model of 'eternal recurrence of the same' to dislodge the Idea of Progress.[36]

    A cyclical theory of history was adopted by Oswald Spengler (1880–1936), a German historian who wrote a very influential pessimistic study of the end of progress called The Decline of the West (1920). The horrors of World War I challenged the unblinking optimism of the modernizers.


and this is how they like it. It's a natural tendency for the people who grab power for its own sake to enjoy lording over and manipulating others


https://www.quora.com/Do-psychopaths-enjoy-manipulating-others-like-one-would-have-fun-playing-an-instrument-Do-they-enjoy-the-process-as-well-as-the-reward-If-it-depends-then-what-is-more-common?share=1
    Do psychopaths enjoy manipulating others like one would have fun playing an instrument? Do they enjoy the process as well as the reward? If it depends, then what is more common?
 
    Zack Middleton, A Sociopath diagnosed with ASPD - Twice
 
    Not a Psychopath but since you A2A’d I’ll give you my two cents.
 
    We need to remember that not every one Soci/Psychopath is the same, so there’s no real answer to this, I can however give you my own views.
 
    I don’t usually actively seek manipulating someone, only if I need a big life change or am low on money for example. Though I do sometimes see a fun opportunity to do so and will do it just for fun yes, this is usually a situation where I can see that it will be entertaining for a while or that it will be a new learning experience/to fill a curiosity.
 
    A recent example of this is some chats I had online, I played around with a few people in a bizarre relationship to see if I could sway the direction of things with them both. Had no real point but it was fun, so to fully answer. Yes, we’d probably do it here and there, and I personally enjoy the process more than the results if my inspiration was purely for fun.


https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/okhrana-the-paris-operations-of-the-russian-imperial-police/5474-1.html
    According to one authority, Rachkovsky was a "born intriguer" who "delighted" in forging documents. He allegedly was among those responsible for the anti-Semitic Protocols of the Elders of Zion, perhaps the most infamous political forgery of the 20th century.



I think they get something out of it. But they need to rationalize this behavior. And that's hard to do if they believe in the idea of progress. They need an excuse to dismiss this idea.

Maybe this guy is helping with that:


https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2017/mar/09/in-russia-the-persecution-of-jehovahs-witnesses-begins-all-over-again

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2017/dec/14/jerusalem-for-christians-jews-and-muslims-is-both-a-city-and-an-idea

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2017/nov/02/before-balfour-the-reformation-helped-to-create-the-state-of-israel

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2017/oct/05/the-truth-about-capitalism-is-out-as-marxs-magic-cap-starts-to-slip

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2017/oct/26/why-the-soviet-attempt-to-stamp-out-religion-failed

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2013/mar/08/history-progress-underpinned-hidden-theology


since he sets himself up as a boogeyman for a lot of the people they have as their agents who react strongly against religion, then he says christianity owns the idea of progress.

whatever his intention, HLI guys unusual ideas of civilization being cyclic would also help with that and is part of why it stands out. It's weird that a secret society would try to get its members to believe it. He sounds like he really believes it but also says he has doubts. He says he decided the rest of the world outside his society does have hope for progress after all, but hints at this being a controversial idea among the factions he identified in his society. He identified a debate over the idea of progress.


got a sense that this idea was important to them from writings of some of their agents:

http://longnow.org/seminars/02008/apr/28/historian-vs-futurist-on-human-progress/
    In response, Ferguson noted Schwartz's "faith in technology" and proposed it reflected his training as an engineer. "Aren't you like the pre-1914 people who said that war was impossible because of all the new technology and commerce?" Schwartz agreed that the parallel is worrying.


some of their fake news propaganda goes toward this weird hyper-optimism in the future and gives it a funny name ("futurism") (see propornot and write-up on leon feurth), which I guess gives them something to ridicule (like its part of the pattern seen in fake-news type propaganda of taking an idea too far and twisting it to trash that idea. So the backlash against futurism will make people more inclined against the idea of progress.)


if they are against the idea of human progress they are really fucked up and this is a matter of concern

Fergeson a good example

he's a historian who writes misleading on history, especially WWI, and looks like one of their agents. But if he knows they started WWI, agrees with this decision and think its worth helping cover it up, then goes on some staged debate to argue WWI is a counterexample to the idea of human progress, what does that say about what this guy believes? (and how many more like him are there)





from looking at their members so far, a common thread in their philosophy is that "might makes right," the strong should dominate the weak (a la Nietzsche), power is what matters and should be got by any means--this is also implicit in Machiavelli's reasoning and cited by the protocols to justify those plans which were carried out.


I think you can get a sense of how this worldview is attractive to some people and how it comes about. It helps to look at the dynamics between "sociopaths" and "neurotypicals," a subject probably best studied without condemning or condoning.


from this: https://pastebin.com/c935hrBR


a sociopath has to go his or her whole life with faking to fit in

they do not have a primal intuitive sense of right or wrong, nor do they have a drive to act in a way neurotypicals see as right. At the same time, they know they have to act according to these ways that seem arbitrary to them, or they will face social ostricization. A sociopath may find many times in his or her life where he forgets to act in moral ways and is punsished for it, and so societal pressures to act morally, which comes naturally for the neurotypical, can become a source of persistent annoyance for the sociopath. In a way that is unique to a sociopath, they are therefore susceptible to seeing morality as a limit on their freedom, a form of snobbery, even a form of oppression, and grow to resent morality and those who preach it.

they fake grief when they have to, like when someone dies, and get frustrated and exasperated that they have to do so, resenting neurotypicals calling them a monster if they don't keep it up

likewise, they must constantly fake guilt, empathy, and interest in others

faking is draining, and the most successful at it are the most motivated

a sociopath must necessarily mislead neurotypicals to fit in among them. The "mask" that they put on is to present themselves as neurotypical, which serves to conceal their true thoughts and opinions. Thus the life of a sociopath is one of constant deception. Maybe with practice, lying for them because as easy as talking, and they do not feel the guilt and worry of being caught that neurotypicals feel when lying that gives them away. A sociopath is necessarily, at varying levels, a practiced liar, and an adept one.

so too are they adept at manipulating others, which is a form of deception. In making the decision to manipulate someone, or use them and discard them, they do not anticipate the feeling of remorse that a neurotypical would.

In pursuing myopic and selfish ends, this gives the sociopath power over neurotypicals. Most neurotypicals aren't on the look-out for sociopaths and are naturally trusting, and won't see through a sociopath's mask or suspect manipulation. At the same time, a sociopath is prone to excel at manipulation.

A sociopath has an additional advantage over neurotypicals, especially in today's world, in that they do not feel fear, or feel a diminished form of fear.


I think it's these last two that can trip them up? and be exploited...

because there is natural friction and cause of aggravation between the sociopath and neurotypical, because the former lacks inhibitations that can be seen as a weakness in the latter, and because the sociopath can manipulate and use the neurotypical like a plaything, the sociopath is susceptible to a certain ideology, itself an instrument in a scheme of manipulation, which is the ideology of elitism. 


https://counsellingresource.com/features/2008/11/24/predatory-aggressive-personality/
    No doubt these individuals are radically different creatures from most human beings. Neurotic denial of this reality has been the doing in of many victims of psychopaths. But in my opinion, at the root of their pathology is not so much their very different wiring, but their extraordinarily positive appraisal of their difference from the rest of us. In a most malevolent example of malignant narcissism to the extreme, these individuals consider themselves beings superior to the rest of the human race. They view individuals with inhibitions rooted in emotional bonding to others as inferior creatures and, therefore, their rightful prey. This is the justification they use for their pattern of predatory engagement with others.

    If it weren’t bad enough that some individuals are in very neurotic denial about the uniquely abnormal makeup of predatory aggressive personalities, many are also easily taken in by their manipulative skill. Predatory aggressives know human nature perhaps better than anyone. Most have made a study of it. They know every human vulnerability, shortcoming, yearning, need, etc. And they know how to mimic just about everything that is human, from emotion to empathy. But it’s all part of the unrelenting con game of taking advantage of those perceived to be at heart an inferior species. 

    I recently answered an inquiry from a man who wondered if his therapist had advised him correctly that psychopaths are “unable” to tell right from wrong, much in the same way as someone who suffers from an active psychosis. I responded to him that these individuals understand extremely well what other people consider to be necessary standards for civil human relations. They could, if they so chose, conform their conduct to such standards. However, they see these standards as just another example of a deficient species restraining itself from self-advancement. And, because they consider it a mark of their superiority not to be encumbered by such concerns, they choose not to abide by any law other than the law of personal gain.


Consider the process of ideological subversion as described by the defector Bezmenov. In that, he described for example how the ideology (or worldview) of racism can be used as a weapon to sink a country in ethnic conflict. How does the ideology of racism take root by the active measures we have studied? It is done little by little. The repitition of holding up in the press, film, and social media examples of hardship and virtue in the ingroup (your group) and privilege, hypocrisy, rascality in the outgroup (the others) imprints bias on the subconscious mind.


https://www.google.com/search?q=white+site%3Abreitbart.com
    Lawsuit: YouTube Stopped Hiring White and Asian Males to Improve ...

https://www.google.com/search?oq=immigrant+site%3Abreitbart.com
    Illegal Immigrant Accused of Molesting, Raping 7-Year-Old Girl and 


It is an automatic habit of man to size-up and pin a type on every person he meets, to assign a model of how he predicts that person will behave, especially toward himself, and to erect the scaffolding for his initial opinion of that person at first sight. These measures strand by strand rewire the part of the mind that brings forth in the mind a response for every new person you meet and every hypothetical person you think about.

If you see a man frothing at the mouth and waving a knife you might expect him to stab you and dislike him. If you see a clown holding balloons you might expect him to make you an animal balloon and like him. You might have a different reaction if you were stabbed by a clown as a child. But importantly, your subconscious reaction might change, if only a little, just from watching a horror movie about murdering clowns; you could imagine your reaction to seeing a clown might change substantially if every other day, you read in the paper a news story about clowns stalking people in the middle of the night (which actually happened, breifly https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_clown_sightings). So the virtual world of film and print, which can be deceiving, shapes our reaction to the real world just by choosing what we are repeatedly exposed to. (here's an article on this: https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/articles/199805/where-bias-begins-the-truth-about-stereotypes) Once formed bias is hard to change one way or another.

Some people are curious, or can become that way, and look for ideas that explain patterns they see--or think they see--and cling to ideas that rationalize their stubborn biases. So the breitbart reader eventually discovers the alt-right, then "race realism," then white supremicism. The racist decides other races are inferior, the sexist other genders, the partisan members of other parties, etc. The bias, the sum of these experiences, is the basis for the ideology, which purports to explain them, and sum up these patterns in maxims that can be generalized according to reason. So the "scientificness" of scientific racism appears to be true to the racist, so long as they hold their experiences to be a reflection of reality, even if these experiences are no more than reading propaganda on the internet, and far from the whole picture of reality.

By virtue of their different natures, THE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN SOCIOPATHS AND NEUROTYPICALS TEND TOWARD CERTAIN BIASES IN SOCIOPATHS. These biases can be inflamed and exploited by the subverter, who craft ideologies as weapons, so that the behavior of sociopaths can be bent toward their whims. Why is it so easy to manipulate and use the neurotypical, to the benefit of yourself and the ruin of the other? It is because the neurotypical is weak, you are the predator and they are the prey, and this is the natural state of things. Why do I find myself annoyed and exasperated by neurotypicals? The limits on their minds of fear and morality make their words and ideas little more than irrational babble. Why is it so grating when neurotypicals take up grief and outrage at so many things and expect me to join them? It is because their weakness predisposes them to whining about things they can't change.


other things in ideology:

no such thing as rights (or rights = whining?)

people who express dislike at carnage, slaughter, misery = "moral fags" or whiners

"concern trolls"

I think the talk about outrage or dislike of bad things happening gets grating on sociopaths, doesn't resonate with them

"moral fag" more like someone who calls you out, "why don't you do x?"


where does disdain of whiners show up in ideology, propaganda?

"liberal tears" -- they are sore losers

"concern troll" -- that's just the way the world is

or -- why should I care I got my own stuff to do

a lot of times set up opponents as whiners, e.g. chuck schumer tears on immigrants

guess this is to illustrate proponents of immigrant rights as weak

not really sure what logic of this is

more like a disposition, basically "fuck weak people"

well there's a logic, if you're weak you deserve to lose

that's a big one

so just make some group look weak and they will decide they deserve to lose



how does "fuck weak people" or "weak deserve to lose" appeal to bias that might come naturally in sociopaths?

rationalizes using people, and some of them enjoy using people. that's kind of different, but I guess "I enjoy using people" is a bias but a different kind



what is logic of weak deserve to lose?

in conservative ideology its kindof like social darwinism argument, like if weak people win and their ideas (DNA?) get passed on worse overall

leaves definition of "weak" which is subjective



similar, or maybe it's more like "the strong should lord over the weak"

like they say the masses are too dumb and need a super-smart and rational ruler (that's you!!!) to guide them



another one: lying and cheating to get ahead is permissible

end justifies means might makes right

I think its like this: a smart and motivated sociopath person might see themselves becoming more successful than those around them, and decide its not because their smart but because their a sociopath?

like: I got ahead because I was super cunning and cheated and this is why might makes right

someone who believes this will usually think they are super-smart anyway



most people are stupid

I guess they think this because there are examples of people doing stupid things?

more like "masses are stupid", which I guess they believe because masses will fall for their deception in the first place.

remember they go through whole lives at least telling white lies or fronting, putting on mask. And most people are trusting and fall for it. And okhrana ideology to explain that is that they fall for it because they are stupid and inferior.



"rights are made up" or "just an abstract though"

don't completely get this one because everyone knows what a right is and every concept is made up

might just be wordplay

does it prey on sociopaths? a little I think, in that its said sociopaths tend to have trouble respecting rights of others. Like without empathy its hard to think about what happens to others based on your actions and so easier to violate someone elses rights.

Does this ideology play on innate characteristics or biases that are formed?

innate characteristic of lack of empathy is one

maybe they consistently get accused of violating others rights and get annoyed by it, so easier to conclude "rights just made up" and that would be appealing



think "end justifies the means" appealing because they get flack for being immoral a lot and this rationalizes acting in immoral ways



ideology in protocols and HLI guy is that masses can't have a rational debate and can't figure things out on their own. I think one thing that might make it easier to believe that for sociopaths is having conversations with them on touchy moral subjects that sociopath might not realize and seeing neurotypical get offended and not want to talk about it. So it's like they will think they are willfully ignorant on things and held back by their concsience.


...





https://www.reddit.com/r/sociopath/comments/44jnsa/understanding_the_predatory_aggressive/
    Understanding the Predatory Aggressive Personality (I thought this was a far more accurate description of "sociopathy" than most of the other stuff I've seen)

    I'm relatively conflicted on saying that I'm 'better' than empaths. It really depends how you look at it.

    If you examine it on a Neitzschean level, it's fundamentally undeniable that PAPs are the Apex predator, the super-human. Nietzsche wrote extensively in The Genealogy of Morality that the #1 constrictor of human behavior and the ultimate divider between Slave and Master was the slave's strict adherence to Christian morality. Because they value things like kindness, empathy, and fairness, they develop an aversion to the steps necessary to assert control over others. A PAP person is then devoid of these things allowing him, from the very beginning, to have an advantage over everyone else in the event that he's able to control himself and follow through with things (which Sociopaths seldom are). If you want to romanticize it, he is free to develop his own directives for behavior because society is incapable of influencing him. Saying you're better isn't 'malignant narcissism', it's realism. Calling you a narcissist is the neurotypical's way of protecting his ego. He literally needs to believe that you're some form of scum for his entire life's philosophy to make sense. He's in denial, making nonsensical emotional appeals to rationalize his weaknesses.

    However, it's likely that that's an inferior way of living. Zapffe argued that humans are over-evolved and have developed mechanisms meant to cope with what he calls 'the pain of living'. Hilariously, these are things like kindness, empathy, social relationships, Christianity, etc. They are all meant to distract us from the idea that life is meaningless, that everyone we love is going to die, and that you will spend all of your time on Earth dominated by an external locus of control.

    Sophocles says:

        Not to be born is the most to be desired; but having seen the light, the next best thing is to go whence one came as soon as may be.

    This is ancient greek for "Bro, life totally sucks and you should be fucking elated that you get to die at some point".

    Normal people can deal with this through the mechanisms I've mentioned above. However, this is problematic for the Sociopath. He is then an under evolved variation of human since he doesn't have a way to cope with the existential crisis inherent in his existence. He is trapped in his own Nihilism. Because of this, he chooses to devote himself to all manner of hedonistic practices never managing to feel fulfilled or at ease. He's fucked from the start, ill-equipped.

    I should be studying for economics.


Neechee at work? (but not quite)


https://www.reddit.com/r/sociopath/comments/6c1732/what_does_it_take_to_make_you_angry/
    What does it take to make you angry?

    Moral fags, philantropists and people who mistreat animals in general. That's pretty much it. I admit that I've made fun of the first ones more than once, though.

    Edit: • Moral fags specifically referred to: feminazis, triggered members of any races, the standard black-humour-hater person. • People who mistreat animals reffered to: bullfighters, illegal hunters, animals black market sellers, people that put any human being over the life of any animal considering it inferior.


/pol/ at work?