

https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XI%20Oppenheimer.pdf


cross examination by Mr. Robb (starting pg 59)

according to index (pg 3), a cross examination of Charles Christian Lauritsen


pg 68

says heard Peters was communist after the war

"Communist business" came about because "someone told me to be careful about this" but cause he might not be ablte to get permission to go into Mexico


pg 70

asks about Jospeh Weinberg



------


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20III%20Oppenheimer.pdf

Date: April 14, 1954


pg 54

Robb questioning Oppenheimer

(whole doc is Oppenheimer)


Q: do you know anyone who talked and acted like a Communist?

A: don't think in party but Peters "talked along those lines"


they don't ask very good questions...


next one better:


Q: "Did Peters evel tell you that he had been a member of the Party at one time in Germany?"

A: "taht was my impression but he told me that I had misunderstood him. This was before the Nazis --"


pg 54


asks Oppenheimer if there was anyone else fitting "these tests you have given us", objective indica of Communst sympathy or Communist connections"

sounds like Oppenheimer had some time to think about this


pg 49:

    ...I was clear that I would not collaborate with Communists no matter how much I sympathized with that they pretended to be after. This was absolute. I believe I have not done so since.


pg 51

    "...it seems clear to me that there were tactical positions on current issues, which might be very sensible looking or popular or might coincide with the views of a lot of people who were not communists."


interesting that after O testified that communists were "pretending" Robb ignores that and quizzes him on communist doctrine



    Q What I am getting at is, how could you tell when a man was talking like one? what would a man who was talking like a Communist say?

    A In 1942 and 1943, I should think that an excessive pride and interest and commitment in the Soviet Union, a misstatement of their role, a veiw that they had always been right in everything they had done, these would have been some of the earmarks.


Oppenheimer surrounded by Soviet agents, concludes mark of a Communist is being an arrogant asshole


pg 54

with this in mind, Oppenheimer points out that Peters "talked like a Communist" and "this was before the Nazis --" then Robb cuts him off


...


pg 68

Oppenheimer says Peters his student, Peters at Berkely Rad Lab in 1943

know him 'really fairly well', social, him and his wife visited O's house and probably vice-versa


pg 71

O says Peters caught in Munich at time of Hiter's rise, "had taken part in that struggle. I would then have said -- I have subsequently said -- as a Communist."

    He then told me that this is an exaggeration. He was put in Daschau, that he managed to get out, that his wife and he escaped the country, that they come to this country, that they made some sort of a deal or agreement that he would work and she would go to medical school, and then she would work and he would go to college or to the university.



    ...Q Did you regard Peters as in any way a dangerous man to be on a secret war project?

    A I am alleged to have said so.

    Q Did you say so?

    A I think I did.

    Q When?

    A At Los Alamos.

    Q When?

    A I think in 1943.

    Q 1943?

    A But I am not sure. I think not that that he was a dangerous man to have on a secret war project, no. I think what I was asked by DeSilver, "Here are four names, Bohm, Weinberg and somebody else and Peters; which of these would you regard as the most likely to be dangerous, and I think I answered Peters."

    ...Q When had you formed that view that Peters might be a dangerous man?

    A During the period that he decided not to come to Los Alamos.

    Q What caused you to form that opinion?

    A The way he talked about things.

    Q Had he ever told you that he was a member of the Communist Party in Germany?

    A I believe that he had, or that I had been told it by a friend. I believed that he had. He told me later that I had misunderstood him.

    Q When did you believe that he told you that?

    A Early.

    Q When?

    A Late Thirties.

    Q Who was the friend that you thought might have told you?

    A Possibly Jean Tatlock.

    Q Did she know Peters, too?

    A Yes.


    ...Q Did anyone else besides Miss Tatlock tell you anything about Peters' Communist connections?

    A No. The way in which this story came to me was that he had been involved in the great battle between the Communists and the Nazis in Germany; not that he was a member of theCommunist Party in this country or anything like that. I think it came from him and I don't think it came from Miss Tatlock, but I am not sure.


Oppie was asked out of list of scientists who was most dangerous and said Peters, thought him dangerous because of "the way he talked about things." Heard his communist origin story of fighting nazis and escaping from Peters or Tatlock.

Oppie thought at one point (or still does) that Peters was in Communist Party of Germany but Peters said he misunderstood him

Oppie sounds defensive about allegations that he said Peters was too dangerous for clearance allegations from 1949 hearing, which cost Peters his job


https://www.atomicheritage.org/profile/bernard-peters
    Peters was born in Poland and later moved to Germany. It was there that he became involved in the opposition to the Nazi Party. His anti-Nazi politics caused him to be arrested and interned at Dachau in 1933. He would be released without explanation several months later. 

    ...In 1949, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) launched an investigation into Peters for his ties to the Communist Party and the labor movement. J. Robert Oppenheimer testified against him, asserting that he was an avid communist. The investigation eventually cost Peters his job at the University of Rochester, and eventually he left the country entirely to take a professorship in India.


Oppie's words twisted from 1949 hearing? sounds like he might feel guilty that his testimony lead to Peters losing his job.

this is commission decision:

http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/opp06.asp
    In 1949 Dr. Oppenheimer testified before a closed session of the House Un-American Activities Committee about the Communist Party membership and activities of Dr. Bernard Peters. A summary of Dr. Oppenheimer's testimony subsequently appeared in a newspaper, the Rochester Times Union. Dr. Oppenheimer then wrote a letter to that newspaper. The effect of that letter was to contradict the testimony he had given a congressional committee (Tr. pp. 210-215).

    ...Peter's letter.-I find it difficult to conclude that the letter written by Dr. Oppenheimer in 1949 following his testimony about Dr. Bernard Peters before a congressional committee is evidence of any fault in character. This carefully composed letter, a copy of which was sent to the congressional committee, was not an attempt to repudiate the testimony relating to Dr. Peters' background but, rather, was a manifestation of a belief that political views should not disqualify a scientist from a teaching job. He was led to this action by the protests of Dr. Bethe, Dr. Weisskopf, and Dr. Peters himself, and of Dr. Condon, and by the "overwhelming belief of the community in which I lived that a man like that ought not to be fired either for his past or for his views, unless the past is criminal or the views led him to wicked actions." One might disagree with this belief without taking it as evidence of untrustworthiness.


would help to know what the testimony actually was...



...


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20III%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 166

    BY MR. ROBB:

    Q I don't want you to, Doctor. Let me read to you from a memorandum from Captain DeSilva at that time -- he must have been promoted -- dated 6 January 1944:

    "Subject, DSM conversation with J. R. Oppenheimer. Captain H. K. Calvert, U.S. Engineers Office, PO Box 1111 Knoxville, Tennessee.

    "1. During a recent conversation with Dr. oppenheimer he brought up the subject of a situation at Berkeley, California. A general discussion followed, touching on such subjects of the AEC which Oppenheimer deplored, and the contacts made by the Proffsor which contacts he believed to be innocent. During the course of the conversation which took place en route to Santa Fe, Oppenheimr touched on the subject of what persons at Berkeley were in his opinion truly danger. He named David Joseph Bohm and Bernard Peters as being so. Oppenheimr stated, hwoever, that somehow he did not believe that Bohm's temperament and personality were those of a dangerous person and implied that his dangerousness lay in the possibility of his being influenced by others. Peters, on the other hand, he described as a 'crazy person' and one whose actions would be unpredictable. He described Peters as being 'quite a red' and stated that his background was filled with incidents which indicated his tendency toward direct action."

    Do you recall that conversation?

    A I recall the conversation, though I don't recall these as accurate words. I remember only being asked by DeSilva, among these people, and I think there were four, which do you think is the most dangerous, and saying Peters.

    Q Did you mention Bohm as truly dangerous?

    A I am quite certain I didn't. I think DeSilva mentioned Bohm, Weinberg and somebody else and Peters.

    Q You say you are quite sure you did not mention Bohm as dangerous?

    A I think so.

    Q You think you did?

    A I did not. I certainly never thought of him that way.

    Q You did not think of him as dangerous. If you had, you would not have spoken to DeSilva in March about brining him to Y, would you?

    A I should hope not. I think there is a garble in this and also the whole tone is not I believe accurate. The conversation was initiated by DeSilva. He presented me with a list of names. I don't believe this is something that I dredged up for him.


to take a guess: they're trying to make it look like he's defending his Communist co-conspirators? After Peters losing his job Oppenheimer might be wary of saying too much about his collegues, and they could exploit that.


...

pg 171

Robb asks if Lomonitz and Bohm refused to answer about epsionage activities

...

pg 180

before this some testimony on his "cock and bull" story about Chevalier

then his testimony on "it was bad practice" to see Tatlock


    Q Doctor, would you break them down? Would you tell us who the Communists were and who the fellow travelers were?

    A Lambert was a Communist. Addis is reported to be a Communist in the Commission's letter. I did not know whether he was a member of the Party or not.



...

pg 182

    Q Chevalier still is your friend?

    A Chevalier is my friend


pg 185

names a bunch of communists



------


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20IV%20Oppenheimer.pdf


pg 163

    Q Doctor, there came a time in 1949 when you testified before the House Committee on Un-American Activities concerning Dr. Peters, didn't you?

    A Right.

    Q Your testimony was thereafter reported in the public press, wasn't it?

    A Yes.

    Q Do you recall what paper it was that it came out in?

    A It was the Rochester paper.

    Q Did you see that item in the Rochester paper?

    A It was sent to me.

    Q Who sent it to you?

    A Oh, many people. Peters, probably Condon, several other people.

    Q Was your testimony accurately reported in the press?

    A As I remember, it was fairly accurately reported in the press. It was supposed to be secret testimony.

    Q I have before me a photostat -- I am sorry I have not a copy, Mr. Garrison, but I will read most of it -- a story of the Rochester Times Union, Rochester, Ny OWrk, June 15, 1949. The headline was : Dr. Oppneheimer Once Termed Peters 'Quite Red'."

    The lead off paragraph is: "Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, wartime director of the atom bomb laboratory at Los Alamos, New Mexico, recently testified that he once termed Dr. Bernard Peters of the University of Rochester 'a dangerous man and quite Red," the Times-Union Washington Bureau reported today."

    The story then continues after some explanatory paragraphs


    ..."In his testimony, Dr. Oppenheimer said he became 'acquainted' with the existence of a Communist cell at Berkeley 'by disclosure of the intelligence agencies of the government'

    ..."Concerning Dr. Peters, Dr. Oppenheimer said he had known the scientist as a graduate student in the physics department in the late 1930's."

    "Said Dr. Oppenheimer:"

    "Dr. Peters was, I think, a German national. He was a member of the German National Communist Party. He was imprisoned by the Nazis, and escaped by a miracle. He came to this country. I know nothing of his early period in this country. He arrived in California, and violently denounced the Communist Party as being a 'do-nothing party.'"

    "Dr. Oppenheimr said he told Major DeSylva he believed Dr. Peters' background was filled with incidents that would point toward 'direct action'."

    "Asked to explain this point, Oppenheimnr observed: "'Incidents in Germany where he had fought street battles against the National Socialists on account of Communists; being placed in a concentration camp; escaping by guile. It seemd to me that those were past incidents not pointing to temperance.'

    "Questioned specifically on his reference to 'direct action', Dr. Oppenheimer said of Dr. Peters:

    "'I think I suggested his attack on the Communist Party as being too constitutional and conciliatory an organization, not sufficiently dedicated to the overthrow of the government by force and violence.'

    "Asked the source of his information that Dr. Peters had been a member of the Communist Party in Germany, Dr. Oppenheimer replied:

    "'It was well known. Among other things, he told me.'"

    "Dr. Oppenheimer said he could 'affirm that there is no connection between his (Peters') work and any application of atomic energy that falls within the jurisdiction of the (Atomic Energy) Commission.. . . I would belive that if Dr. Peters could teach what he knows to a young man capable of learning it, the country would be better off, because if Dr. Peters cannot be employed by the War Department, at least the young man could be employed by the War Department.'"

    Doctor, are those quotations from the news story I have read you an accurate summary of your testimony?

    A They are fairly accurate. I didn't have the transcript at the time. I blieve that a collation was made by Mr. Volpe, who had the transcript, to see how accurate they were.

    Q In other words, you checked it at the time to see if it was an accurate statement?

    A Somewhat later. It was not a very inaccurate statement.

    Q It is substantially accurate, isn't it?

    A I think so.

    Q Did you at that time find anything to complain about in the accuracy?

    A No, not in the accuracy. The fact of the publication.

    Q Yes, you objected to that. Following the publication of that story, did you hear from Dr. Peters?

    A I did.

    Q How did you hear from him?

    A He wrote me -- I was on the way west, and I leanred that he had called my office at Princeton and my secretary reported to me what was bothering him; when I got to Berkeley there was a letter from him.

    Q What did he say?

    A He said that he was appalled and how could I have done him such harm. I don't remember the words of the letter.

    ...Did you hear from anybody else after htis story?

    A I did indeed.

    Q Who?

    A Professor Hans Bethe, Condon, my brother, Weiskopps, perhaps other people.

    Q What did Condon have to say?

    A He said I should not have hurt an innocent and loyal American in that way, that I must take him on at the Institute if he lost his job, that if he lost his job, it would be wholly my doing. That I must try to make restitution, and that he hated to believe that I could have said such a thing, and in an attempt to protect myself.

    I knew very well if my file were ever made public, it would be a much bigger flap.


Garrison and Robb go on about Condon

pg 171


    ...Q Did Peters come alone?

    A His parents live in Berkeley.

    Q What did he say?

    A The general substance was: Was there any way in which I could help him to keep his job at the University. He also said I had misunderstood him about his being a member of the Communist Party in Germany. He worked with the Communists, he was not ashamed of it, but he was not actually a member and nobody could prove he was. He said, "You don't know my views about the American Communist Party" and I should not have quoted him.

    Q You were sure he had told you he had been a member?

    A I felt quite sure.

    Q You were sure had had told you he had been a member?

    A But I am not infallible in these things as is being made very clear in these proceedings.


    ...Q Who is Mr. Volpe?

    A General Counsel of the Atomic Energy Commission. He had accompanied me to the hearings. I told him of the great disturbance and I then wrote a letter ot the Rochester papers which you no doubt have, the purpose of which was to undo any injury that I should not have done to Peters. I think I also wrote or communicated with the officials of the University saying that I would be glad to talk to them when I got back.


pg 174

    ...Q And in that letter you retracted some of the testimony you had given, did you not?

    A Right. I had that letter shown to the committee.

    Q Just for the record, I will read the letter. Do you have it there, Mr. Garrison?

    ...The letter is dated Jun 30, 1949, headed "Dr. Oppenheimer Explains."

    "Editor, Democrat and Chronicle:

    "Recently the Democrat and Chronicle published an article based on reports of my testimony before an executive sesssion of the House Committee on Un-American Activities, which it seems to me could be damaging to the good name of Dr. Bernard Peters, of the University of Rocheester. 

    "I first knew Dr. Peters about 12 years ego during his student days in California, I knew him, not only as a brilliant student, but as a man of strong mpral principles and of high ethical standards. During those years his political views were radical. He expressed them freely, and sometimes, I thought, without~mperanceo This seeme4 to me not unnatural in a man who had suffered as he had at Nazi bands. I have never known Dr. Peters to commit a dishonorable act, nor a dis loya 1 one. 

    "Dr. Peters has recently inforlted me that I was right in believing that in the early days he bad participated in the Communist Movement in Germany but that I was wrong in, believing -- as the article stated -- that he had ever held a membersh5.p in t:.e Communist pa~ty. That he has ~xiaJ no regrets for his actions in Nazi Germany he himself made clear in his statement that acsc·.'tpanied the publi:;, ·;io·1 of the artie 1«:!.

    "From the publislua a:r·~ic to one might cc·r·.c ludc t;Ja~~ Dr. Peters had advoGated tlv::• v:\c·.ent over·throw oi ,;J:3 canst i tutiona 1 go\'EJrnmant o:fl the UniJ.;ed States. ~"i·? h:'iD gh•en an eloquent denia 1. of 'this in hie published statmr.··n:t. 1 believe his statemento 111\s indicated in the ~nticle:~ the questin£. whic;h we:~e put to me by tbe House Committt~·~ wi;h reg~rd 1:c D1·. Pet.::.::·,;: arose in part because of reports of discussion bet.~een me ~md the Intelligence Offtcers at Los A l:amos. T~,c~w Los Alamos consultations took place ln connection with confidentiEl wartime assianmenta. I wist to wake public my profound regret that anything said in the context should have been so misconstrued, and so abused~ that it could damage Dr. Peters and threaten his di.stinguished future career as a scientist. "Beyond this specific i.'3sue, there is grou·1a for another, more genamal, and even g:~eatnr concerno PJlitical opinion. no matter how radical oz· how f:reely expres,:;·]dp c)oes not disqualify a scientist fern h  Lgh career in scienc·~e; it does not disqualify him as a teaci1er of science; it does not impugn his integrity no:r his hono:: ~ We have seen in ·Other 697 countries criteria of political orthodoxy applied to ruin scientists, and to put an end to their work. This has ,brought with it the attrition of science. Even more, it haG been part of the destruction of freedom of inquiry, anc1 of political freedom itself. This is no path to follow for a p.aople deter-mined to say free. "Robert Oppenheimer, Barkeley, California, June 30, 1949."

    BY MRo ROBB: Q Doctor, is that the letter you sent?

    A It is. 



pg 176

Oppie says upset testimony made public


    ...Q How had your testimony been misconstrued?

    A It was being misconstrued to mean that he should not keep his job. I had explicitly said that I thought it was good he keep his job.



Oppie says report accurate, letter "to repudiate is a little strong"


pg 177

later, asked about Peters' Communist party membership in Germany, which he testified was true in 1949 hearing


    Q You would not have said that, would you, had you not been absolutely sure it was true?

    A I was convinced it was true, or I would not have said it.

    Q Beg pardon?

    A I was convinced it was true.

    Q And yet when Peters came to see you and you received a letter from Dr. Condon, you in effect repudiated that tesimony, didn't you?

    A Does it say that I don't believe he was a member of the Party?

    Q I have just read it to you.

    A I have forgotten.

    [reads letter]

    ...I don't say I believe his denial. I just say he denied it.

    BY MR. ROBB: 

    Q Very well. Isn't the implication of your letter that you were strong in believing tha the had been a member of the Party?

    A I think it leaves the matter open.

    Q Was it your intention to convey that impression when you wrote the letter?

    A I think the sum total of my intention was not to get this guy fired from the University of Rochester because of intemperate remarks I made before the House Committee.


^^^

press, questioners missing elephant in room here?

another way to phrase it, for selfish people: he didn't want to be the guy who helped scummy HUAC fire a guy from uni for his political views

press was attacking him before letter (moscow times report) saying he testified on Peters to "avoid red charges", probably didn't want to be "that guy" either

also doesn't want to be a "dirty commie traitor" and lose his job either, has a balancing act to play

Oppie seems like a guy who cares about his reputation so the press would have a lot of sway over him, with letter and testimony comes off as reacting to them

should look at press reaction after the HUAC leak--already have reaction of Moscow times, Peters and some other scientists, apparently an unpopular move in Communist or left world

what was reaction in press after his letter?


see also pg 101 https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20V%20Oppenheimer.pdf


...


should look into this more later


so far looks like active measures to mess with Oppenheimer--in hearing he told of Peters' communist past but said he thinks he should keep his job. hearing was leaked selectively in a way that made it sound like Oppenheimer accepted Peters' losing his job. Oppenheimer gets blamed for selling out his grad student for political believes, and has choice of either eating that and looking like shit in his scientific circles or defending Peters and raising spectre of his Communist sympathies. Peters' went along with this coming in and ragging on Oppenheimer. So they put him in a bind where he looks bad either way.