
http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/opp01.asp
	The Board had before it a recording of a conversation between Dr. Oppenheimer and Lt. Col. Boris T. Pash, War Department intelligence officer, who had the responsibility for investigating subversive activities at the Radiation Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley. This conversation took place on August 26, 1943, at the Radiation Laboratory.

	It was on this occasion that Dr. Oppenheimer reported the incident to Government authorities. He named Eltenton but refused to identify Chevalier. He also stated that the unnamed contact (Chevalier) had approached three persons on the atomic project and in the course of the interview mentioned other factors, such as the use of microfilm or other means and the involvement of the Russian Consulate.


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XVI%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 10

Aug 26 convo between Pash, Oppenheimer and Johnson

Pash revers to a conversation on 25th 

O recognizes, was with Rossi [Lomanitz]. wanted to tell him he was indiscreet, "I know that that's right that he had revealed information." might embarrass him, "It doesn't seem to have been capable of embarrassing him - to put it bluntly."

	P: Well, that is not the particular interest I have. It is something a little more, in my opinion, more serious. Mr. Johnson said there was a possibility that there may be some other groups interested.


O says "a man whose name I have never heard" with Soviets was in position to transmit nuclear secrets securely to the Soviets. Says tbh would like idea of "informing the Russians we were working on this problem" but not "friendly to the idea of having it moved out the back door. I think that it might not hurt to be on the look-out for it."

P asks for more info

pg 13

O says "approaches were always to other people", "feel that to give more, perhaps, than one name, would be to implicate people whose attitude was one of bewilderment rather than one of cooperation." Says "I know of no case" of these contacts.

Then names Eltenton. says "he talked to a friend of his who is also an acquaintance of one of the men on the project." "I think to go beyond that would be to put a lot of names down, of people hwho are not only innocent but whose attitude was 100% cooperative."


P says need to be discrete, pushes for more information which says will help speed investigation

	O: Well I'm giving you the one name that I think is, or isn't - I mean I don't know the name of the man attached to the Consulate - I think I may have been told or I may not have been told and I have, at least not purposely, but actually forgotten. He is -- and he may not be here now. These incidents occured of the order about 5, 6, 7 months ago.


Oppenheimer getting nervous?

this whole time, he was asked by Chavellier to pass to Eltenton and hadn't reported the incident, I guess at this point still considered Chavellier "friend"

after this Johnson says:

	J: I was wondering, Dr. Oppenheimer, if there was a particular person - maybe a person on the Project that they were trying to pump information from - that if we knew who those were, would at least know where to look for a leak, not from the standpoint of . . . , but looking at a certain picture.


Oppenheimer would know a certain person--himself

	P: Here's the point that I would feel

	O: I would feel that the people that they tried to get information from were more or less an accident (interpolation) and I believe I would be making some harm by saying that 

	P: Yes. Here's the thing - we of course assume that the people who bring this information to you are 100% with you, and therefore there is no question about their intentions. However, if -


Oppenheimer has already revealed that he knows something that some as of yet murky unamed people have given him this information, and Pash points to this


	O: Well, I'll tell you one thing - I have known of two or three cases, and I think two of the men were with me at Los Alamos - they are men who are very closely associated with me

	P: Have they told you that either they thoght they were contacted for that purpose or they were actually contacted for that purpose?

	O: They told me they were contacted for that purpose.

	P: For tha tpurpose.

	O: That is, let me give you the background. The background was -- well you know how difficult it is with the relations between these two allies, and there are  alot of people who don't feel very friendly to Russia, so that they information - a lot of our secret information, our Radar and so on, doesn't get to them, and tehy are battling for their lives and they would like to have an idea of what is going on and this is just to make up in other words for the defects of our official communication. That is the form in which it was presented.

	P: Oh, I see.

	O: Of course, the actualy fact is taht since it is not a communication which ouhgt to be taking place, it is treasonable. But it wasn't presented in that method. (Garble) It is a methoer carrying out a policy which was more or less a policy of the government and the form in which it came was that an interview be arranged with this men Eltenton who had very good contacts with a man from the Embassy attached to the Consulate who was a very reliable guy (that's his story) and who had a lot of experience in microfilm work, or whatever the hell.


looks like start of Oppenheimer's "cock and bull" story.

Maybe has a grain of truth to it? guessing this is how it was presented to Oppenheimer, but he's saying others were approached and not him. Guess Chevalier told Oppenheimer "ally" Russian government need help to make up for "defects in our official communication" (reference to Oppenheimer's idea that bomb should be shared with Soviets?)

in a way sounds like covering for his ass--like he felt need to explain the approach wasn't presented as treasonable, was presented as "carrying out a policy which was more or less a policy of the government"

hearkens to above where Oppenheimer says "I'm in favor of telling Russians about bomb but not in back channel way"--basically he's sensitive to charges that his motives are treason


	P: Well, now I may be getting back to a little systematic picutre . . . These people whom you mentioned, who (two?) are down with you now . . . were they contacted by Eltenton direct?

	O: No.

	P: Through another party?

	O: yes.

	P: Well, now, could we know through whom that contact was made?

	O: I think it would be a mistake, that is, I think I have told you where the initiative came from and that the other things were almost purely accident and that iw ould involve people who ought not to be involved in this.


willing to name Eltenton but not Chevalier

pg 17

O says obvious "channels in this case" would be sympathetic to Soviets and connected with Communist Movements "I don't need to tell you that." This is after P questions him on Eltenton's memberships in Communist organizations (which Oppenheimer has donated to a lot of them)

gives some information on Chevalier, says "member of the faculty"

	P: A member of the faculty here? Eltenton made it through a member of the faculty to the Project.

	O: As far as I know - these approaches were - there may have been more than one person involved. I don't know.


guessing Oppenheimer starting to regret giving that info on Chevalier?

	pash follows:

	P: Here's how I feel about this Leftist inclination. I think that whether a man has "left" or "right" inclinations, if his character which is back of it - if he's willing to do this, it doesn't make any difference what his inclinations are. It's based on his character primarily and not

	O: A thing like this going on, let us say, with the Nazis would have a somewhat different color. I don't mean to say that it would be any more deserving of attention, or any more dangerous, but it would involve rather different motives.

	P: Oh yes, sure.


O gets defensive? seems like early on he bought the idea that trusting the Soviets a good idea since both U.S. and Russia were at war with Nazis

pg 19

	
pressed for any other people contacted, Oppenheimr names Lomanitz but also comes off defensive of him

says he "doesn't have any doubt" that people near him would pass secrets if they heard one from Lomanitz. Says that is why he feels strongly that association with Communsit movement not compatible with being on a secret war project.


also says "I more or less made a stir about it when the question of his induction came up, that his man may have been indiscreet in circles which would lead to trouble."


didn't answer his question, but I guess Oppenheimer saying he'd raised concerns about people on the project before and trying to affirm his loyalty


pg 20

Pash "I get your point," but presses for name of Chevalier. This time says "not for purpose of taking him to task" but to "try to see Eltenton's method of approach"

Oppenheimer says he wont name because he thinks Eltenton is dangerous and should be watched, but can't speak in same way of Chevalier because "I am convinced from the way in which they handled the thing that they themselves thought it was a bad business."

But if Oppenheimr thinks Chevalier loyal and thought it was "bad business," what's the harm in mentioning his name? I guess later found out the harm with Bernard Peters...

Oppenheimer maybe trying to protect Chevelier, trying to protect himself, doesn't trust FBI or all of the above in some combo

"I'm not going to mention the name of anyone in the same breath, even if you say that you will make a distinction." hints at him not trusting Pash

O goes on to say he thinks Chevaliar ran into Eltenton at a party, Eltonton asked "do you think you could help me?" to Chevalier who relayed it to people on project

by 1942 Oppenheimr had known Chevalier for 5 years, since before start of Manhattan project

take on Oppenheimer is that they weren't interested in him because he was on Manhattan project, he was placed on project because they already had influence over him

pg 21

Pash presses Oppenheimer on the "contacts" he mentioned


	P: Were these two people you mentioned - were they contacted at the same time?

	O: They were contacted within a week of each other.

	P: They were contacted at two different times?

	O: Yes, but not in each other's presence.

	P: That's right.

	P: And from what you first heard, there is someone else who probably still remains here who was contacted as well?

	O: I think that is true.


I guess this was completely made up? except last part...


pg 22

Pash says "I am not a bloodhound just need to get as much info as I can"

Oppie says "It is alsmo my duty not to implicate these people, who are acquaintances, or colleagues and so on of those position I am absolutely certain - myself and my duty is to protect them."

a wierd thing to say

not his duty

I think Oppenheimer is worried about a Communist witch hunt and doesn't want to turn over friends to that? with HUAC would be right about that. Does come off as not trusting investigative authorities.

it actually would be his duty to report espionage activity if he saw it, something he didn't do after Chevalier convo (even if all he was willing to do was name Elltenton)

guessing Oppenheimer didn't trust cops and didn't want to get himself involved in a Soviet spy hunt

says he was "absolutely certain" his colleagues (including Chevalier) were loyal, but maybe wasn't so sure about Chevalier later...


pg 23

	O: ...I think that the intermediary between Eltenton and the Project, thought it was the wrong idea, but said that this was the situation. I don't think he supported it. In fact I know it.

	P: He made about at least three contacts that we know of.

	O: Well, I think that's right, yes.


ouch


pg 26


	...O: If I may experess my own opinion as well as my conviction this is not common knowledge.

	P: No, it isn't.

	J: You see a lot of people have reported it to us . .

	P: That's why Mr. Johnson called me up yesterday it sort of

	O: Yes. I mentioned this to Col. Landsale

	P: You did

	O: Yes

	P: Aha, well of course right now I say - ah - it is all new and -- it has come to me


Oppenheimer said he already told this to Lansdale, Pash sounds surprised. What did he say to Lansdale?


pg 32

interesting, Oppenheimer says "up here" might have some espionage problems but "down in our place" everything is 100% in order

"very different" "much harder" situation, "put together in a casual way" pertaining to "the problem of being sure that there were no leaks"

"here" at time of interview would be California

California infested with communists? Oppenheimer ahead of his time!

pg 36

just me or does recording tend to get garbled during interesting bits?



pg 38

"stipulated table of corrections of transcript" of recordinng of Pash, Johnson and Oppenheimer convo Aug 26 1943


pg 61 funny

why are pages 65-67 blank?


pg 75

"original typewritten transcript" between Pash, Lt. Lyall Johnson, and Oppenheimer, I think says lawyers went over this and recording and agreed on transcript on pg 10


http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/opp01.asp
	The Board also had before it a transcript of a conversation between Dr. Oppenheimer and Lieutenant Colonel Lansdale which records that on September 12, 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer again refused to name Chevalier but reported the involvement of three others.
