


http://spartacus-educational.com/Joseph_Weinberg.htm
	Joseph Weinberg was born in New York City. After graduating from City College of New York he moved to California and took a post at the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California. His wife, Muriel Weinberg, had studied at the University of Wisconsin. Both Joseph and Muriel were members of the Communist Party of the United States (CPUSA). (1)

	In 1942 Steve Nelson, became chairman of the San Francisco branch of the CPUSA. He also became involved in espionage activities. "One part of Nelson's task was to gather information on the atomic bomb project. He was seen and overheard meeting with young Communist scientists working at the radiation laboratory at Berkeley. Information gleaned from FBI bugging and wiretaps indicated that several had discussed the atomic bomb project with him. Nelson made notes of what the scientists told him regarding their work, and he was subsequently observed passing materials, which the FBI assumed were his notes, to a Soviet intelligence officer operating under diplomatic cover at the USSR's San Francisco consulate." (2)

	Joseph Weinberg - Soviet Spy

	On of the scientists identified was Joseph Weinberg. FBI officials bugged Nelson's residence and discovered that Weinberg had delivered "highly secret information regarding experiments being conducted at the Radiation Laboratory, Berkeley, pertaining to the atomic bomb." Investigators reported that Nelson had "delivered this classified information to Soviet consular officer Ivan Ivanov for transmittal to the Soviet Union." (3) 


Nelson was a spy, what about Weinberg? was he acting in a conspiracy or was it loose lips?

Weinberg joined Communist Party, so either very bad judgement or intended to spy

I think idea of joining Communist Party was to argue they were being persecuted for political views when put on trial for spying

getting HUAC to attack innocent people (like Oppenheimer more or less) would help make this trick more effective


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=TrlRaHFHspsC&pg=PT485&lpg=PT485&dq=Joe+Weinberg+Steve+Nelson&source=bl&ots=FWGp7c2MbK&sig=lAF3J073bWOZ2by3Jysof6G8Aac&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwji0eyYv-3ZAhVn7oMKHRgkAzMQ6AEIZDAO#v=onepage&q=Joe%20Weinberg&f=false
	Branigan said, "Romerstein refers also to the early cases of atomic espionage. He specifically refers to a man named Joe, later identified as Joseph Woodrow Weinberg, who met Steve Nelson, then the Communist Party functionary in East Bay. The meeting occured in March 1943. He also refers to a meeting between Vassiliy Zubilin and Steve Nelson a few days later. I was the fortunate FBI agent who intercepted both of those meetings. I mention this not because of the personal satisfaction derived and not because it was those meetings that really change dmy career in counterintelligence but for a very simple purpose: following those meetings, the FBI first learned of the Manhattan Project, the experiment to develop an atomic bomb." Roy Godson, editor, Intelligence REquirements for the 1980s: Counterintelligence, p 201.


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=TrlRaHFHspsC&pg=PT206&lpg=PT206&dq=%22Joseph+Weinberg:+Vassiliev+OR+Venona&source=bl&ots=FWGp7c3PfP&sig=wKRrjBakRFd6P42S-Dl6FCxw6fE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiAjf-ZxO3ZAhWhz4MKHRySAbEQ6AEIMzAB#v=onepage&q=%22Joseph%20Weinberg%3A%20Vassiliev%20OR%20Venona&f=false
	Both Weinberg and Nelson were subpoenaed by the House Committee on Un-American Activities in 1949 and questioned together. Weinberg claimed he had never met Nelson, while Nelson invoked the Fifth Amendment when asked if he knew Weinberg. At a subsequent hearing of the committee, Weinberg was shown pictures of Nelson and again claimed never to have met him. When asked whether Nelson had come to his home in August 1943, he claimed not to remember such an occasion. He also denied that Communist Party functionary Bernadette Doyle was in his home at the same meeting. But two special agents of the army's Counter Intelligence Corps assigned to the atom bomb project provided the committee with sworn statements that directly contradicted Weinberg's testimony.


Weinberg lied hardcore, Nelson pleaded 5th

why did Weinberg lie if he could just plead 5th? ended up committing perjury (was that the trial Oppenheimer went to?)

	
	James Murray, the officer in charge of the unit handling security at the atom bomb research project at the University of California, testified that a "highly confidential informant"--in reality, the FBI--had advised his office that a scientist at the radiation laboratory had disclosed secret information about the A-bomb project to a member of the Communist Party, who later passed it on to the Russian consulate in San Francisco. FBI investigators identified the scientists as Joseph Weinberg and the Communist Party functionary as Steve Nelson. While Murray and his colleagues were conducting a physical surveillance of Weinberg in August 1943, the "highly confidential informant" advised them that there would be a meeting that evening in Weinberg's home and that both Nelson and Bernadette Doyle were expected

	Murray and two other intelligence officers, on the roof of an apartment house next door to the Weinberg home, could observe the dining room of his second-story apartment. They saw Nelson, Doyle, Weinberg, and about five other people seated around the table. According to Murray, they could also see Weinberg and Nelson attempting to adjust the window. When the meeting appeared to be breaking up, the intelligence officers ran down the street and observed Nelson and Doyle leaving together.


Weinberg went to meeting with Nelson and other communists while FBI was watching and helped him adjust the window


	Weinberg was indicted for perjury, was tried--and was acquitted. The inability or unwillingness of the FBI to air the wiretap evidenced hobbled the espionage case. But the wiretap on Nelson proved to be a rich source of information for the counterintelligence officers.


did they have a wiretap?

why did they need a wiretap if he was lying about meeting Nelson and they were watching him meeting Nelson?



------


http://berkeleysciencereview.com/read/spring-2001/regarding-scientist-x/
	Sixty years ago, with Pearl Harbor bombs resounding faintly in their ears, physicists at the Lawrence Berkeley Lab were asked to give up their research in order to assist the American war effort. Their mission was to produce fissionable uranium for the super-secret atomic bomb project at Los Alamos. It was during this time that the left-wing backgrounds of some Berkeley physicists became a problem of national security. After the war, the careers of many of these physicists were ruined by accusations of Communist sympathies.

	Why were these left-leaning physicists hounded and fired? Perhaps their persecution was a part of a larger post-war trend, in which all areas of American culture—from Hollywood to academia—were swept by a wave of “Communist hysteria” that chased people with leftist tendencies out of their jobs. But physics—and especially physics research at Berkeley—was particularly polemical, fraught with political overtones even before the war started.

	...Yet the HUAC investigation was not completely fruitless. There was, it turned out, a real spy working in the Berkeley cyclotron during the war. The committee referred to him by the dramatic name, “Scientist X.” According to the published reports of the HUAC hearings, in March 1943 Scientist X contacted Steve Nelson, a local organizer of the Communist Popular Front organization, and late one night went to Nelson’s home bearing a complicated formula. FBI men lurking in the bushes watched as Nelson copied the formula so that it could be returned to the Radiation Lab in the morning. Days later, Nelson contacted the Soviet Vice Consul in San Francisco, and arranged to meet with him in a park on the grounds of St. Francis Hospital. There Nelson transferred a package to the Vice Consul, and within a few days Nelson had a visit from a Russian diplomat at the Washington Embassy, who paid him “ten bills of unknown denomination.” The identity of Scientist X was later revealed to be another of Oppenheimer’s former students, Joseph Weinberg.


Even Berkeley accuses Weinberg of being a spy


	If all of Weinberg’s activities were carried out in full view of FBI binoculars, one wonders why he was never arrested, nor his activities halted during the war. Scientific historian Nuel Pharr Davis speculates that army security was using Weinberg to manipulate the flow of information to the Russians. The fact of the matter was, the electromagnetic separation method was only one of several competing methods of U-235 production used in the early war years, and its effectiveness compared to other methods was highly questionable. The calutron produced only very tiny amounts of U-235, and its beams were difficult to focus. Most historians agree that it was only Lawrence’s bullish enthusiasm that convinced the army to go with his method. In 1954, General Groves testified that the process of electromagnetic separation was relatively unimportant in the American production of uranium. This war secret, it seems, was more useful to the military in misdirecting the Russians than in actually creating the bomb.


also speculates army "using him" to pass misinformation to the Soviets, since I guess gave them a less than best way to produce uranium

is this saying the army used this method anyway? I don't get it

this part especially strange

did Groves testify what author says, that seperation method not important, more useful in misdirection than building Bomb? Groves is suspicious


	...The work of Hynes and Klehr is useful in tempering the story of leftist persecution that is usually told about the post-war years. Butthe obsession with espionage and secrecy surrounding the bomb project—both in the 1940’s and today—is somewhat misleading. It obscures the larger fact that no matter what political intrigues were going on at the time, the Soviet Union would have developed the bomb regardless, because the technology was based on fundamentals of nuclear science which no amount of U.S. secrecy could have hidden. Historians have designated this fact “complementarity,” and its basic premise is that “if we could figure it out, so could they.” In other words, Soviet atomic espionage in America didn’t create their bomb; it only helped them get the bomb faster. Even without results gained from spying, Soviets could have used machines like Lawrence’s cyclotron to eventually discover the nuclear physics necessary to create a bomb. Wartime physicists like Leo Szilard and Hans Bethe realized this crucial fact, and supported the establishment of an international community of scientists that would safely oversee the sharing of bomb technology in an open, transparent, and honest fashion. But such ideas were quickly tabled in the atmosphere of suspicion and hysteria that took hold of the country after the war. The U.S. wanted to jealously hold onto its secret, and when Russia got the bomb, it was assumed that leaky scientists were to blame.


weird for author to say

this is in 2001


this say anything about author?

if smidgen of honesty behind this, could be that she considers herself Russian and gets defensive (right word?), so wants to point out that Russia could have built the bomb anyway. I guess could reasonably take offense at people (press?) immediately jumping to conclusion "RUSSIA HAS BOMB SO CLEARLY STOLE IT." could explain her pointing out "it was assumed that leaky scientists were to blame" even though this is weird since that was correct.

a sociopath might be proud of stealing bomb from U.S. saying they suckered them out of it and this is more fun and efficient

a more carefully looking person might notice that they helped bomb come about and give it to both U.S. and Russia...

tentative guess is author is a scientist-type who feels Russian

Russian family? or born there? (name Teukolsky)

might be non-spy writing on Oppenheimer



	The cloud of suspicion hung most heavily around Oppenheimer himself. A tragic point in the entanglement of physics with politics was the ruination of Oppenheimer’s career, as all of his Communist ghosts returned to haunt him, and his security clearance was revoked after a hearing in 1954. The story comes full circle when we learn that Lawrence, once Oppenheimer’s friend, was then prepared to testify against him, and was only prevented from attending the hearing by a serious stomach ailment. What had caused the cyclotroneer’s new animosity? At stake was the future direction of physics research: Lawrence’s pre-war enthusiasm for bigger and bigger machines translated into a post-war fanaticism for bigger and bigger bombs. He was an energetic campaigner for research into the “Super,” a thermonuclear device which promised to be many thousands of times more powerful than the existing bomb. Oppenheimer, on the other hand, was tentative about the need for Super research, stung by doubts about the ethics of bomb development.


says Op "tragic point in the entanglement of physics with politics," sounds right


Lawrence once Oppenheimer "friend," was going to testify against him but got stomach ache (a Kitty Oppenheimer kind of stomach ache or legitimate stomach ache?)


	Lawrence was ready to interpret Oppenheimer’s opposition as a possible sign of disloyalty—though, conveniently enough, once Oppenheimer was removed from his important position with the Atomic Energy Commission, there was nothing stopping Lawrence’s ambitions for the new bomb research. Lawrence easily raised the money for a new weapons research laboratory near Berkeley, the Livermore Lab, which began work after 1952 under the directorship of Edward Teller—the man whose testimony most damningly declared Oppenheimer to be a security risk at the 1954 trial. It’s not really surprising that, as Brechin Gray points out, Oppenheimer’s legacy was virtually effaced at Berkeley, his portrait conspicuously absent from the “Gallery of Greats” in the Lawrence Hall of Science. After all, the victors get to write history. As it was before the war, once again the interests of money and political power convened to influence the development of scientific research. The result of twenty years of accumulated developments in politicized physics was that Oppenheimer came out on the losing end.


Lawrence and Teller teamed up on Oppenheimer and went ahead with super-bombs

author chalks up to "influence of money and power", which I guess is right but slightly communist sounding

nothing here really points to egregious bias by author


wants physics not to be politicized, which points to her not being agentura

but this article is about spies and their motives


------


1954 hearing questioning Oppneheimer


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XVI%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 118

	...Well anyway did they tell you at this recent meeting that they were members?

	O: No, what they told me was the following: That they were afraid that Lomanitz was being forced out because he was active in the union and that their history was alsom somewhat red.

	L: By their you mean the union or Weinberg and Lomanitz?

	O: Weinberg and Lomanitz. That they felt that they, as they put it, would also be framed and they asked my advice as to whether they should leave the Project. That is what they came to discuss. I said in my opinion Lomanitz was not being framed, that if they were fulfilling three conditions I thought that they should stay on the Project. The conditions were first, that they abided in all strictness all of the security regulations; second, that they had no political activity or contacts of any kind; and third, that they.....

	L: Now why isn't that--can you tell me the names of anyone at Los Alamos that have been or are now Party members?


how many times to the interrupt Oppenheimer when he talks about espionage and ask "but can you tell me about communist party members"? someday somebody should count...


according to Oppenheimer, Weinberg met him, told him he thought he would be framed and asked for advice and whether or not to stay on the project. Oppeneheimer gives them a bit hyppocritical advice (no political contacts of any kind?) but basically says stay if you didn't give away secrets or associate with communists

Oppenheimer claims he didn't know if they were Communist members at this time


...


pg 143-150 interesting



pg 102 says "L" is Lt. Col. Landsdale

interview conducted 12 September 1943



-------

https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA121&lpg=PA121&dq=Joseph+Weinberg+soviet+spy&source=bl&ots=RYKrosPBBP&sig=-yQnmtqd5cxTHFCLZ6bxQ7t89ZI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiuhLeL9e7ZAhUG7YMKHVhCCbsQ6AEIbzAP#v=onepage&q=Joseph%20Weinberg%20soviet%20spy&f=false
	By August 1945 the FBI considered bringing an espionage case against Joseph Weinberg, but the effort was complicated by the Army's reluctance to embarrass either Openheimer or Ernest Lawrence, his former bosses at the Radiation Laboratory, and its difficulty in using in court the most damming evidence, which had been gathered by warrantless wiretaps and bugs. The FBI questioned Weinberg in September 1946, and he denied meetings with or even knowing Steve Nelson, a declaration that only confirmed his guilt in the eyes of FBI agents hwo had listened to their conversation through concealed listening devices.  The Justice Department, however, opposed prosecution because of evidentiary problems under America's judicial rules of what evidence could be presented in court.


so he lied to FBI while HUAC once again doing their own parallel thing to I guess whatever FBI does

"most damming" evidence from from warrantless wiretap...

also says some didn't want to embarrass oppeneheimer


	Two years later, in late August 1948, the U.S. House Committee on Un-American Activites began taking testimony about wartime espionage at Berkeley's Raidation Laboratory. Steve Nelson, at that point a senior CPUSA official, took the Fifth Amendment, while Josepehr Weinberg again denied ever meeting or talking to Steve Nelson. During another round of hearings, brought face-to-face with Nelson, Weinberg repreated his lies, but since those who knew about his Communist ties refused to testify, he continued to escape prosuection.



might be like this: knows FBI can't use evidence in court, lies to FBI, says same to HUAC to be consistent


	Identified only as "Scientist X" when the House Committee on Un-America activities released a report on atomic espionage, Weinberg remained in limbo, teaching at the University of Minnesota while the FBI tried to find admissible evidence to prove that he had committed perjury.


why did HUAC only call him "scientist X?

what were the problems with the FBI's evidence? author hints at disagreement between FBI and DOJ prosecutors.

	
	One grand jury refused to indict him in 1950; two years later, buttressed by the testimony from ex-Communists Paul and Sylvia Crouch that put him at a party meeting in California, a case was prepared through which Weinberg was indicted in May. In the ensuing trial the judge dealt a fatal blow to the prosecution by refusing to allow the transcript of his conversation with Nelson to be entered into evidence. In March 1953, Weinberg was acquitted. His academic career, however, was over. Having been fired from the university, he took a job with an optics company.


why did Judge block transcript in 1953 trial?


	FBI listening devices in Nelson's residence had not only overheard Weinberg discussing the atomic bomb but had also in October 1942 overhead another young Berkeley physicist, Giovanna Rossi Lomanitz, tell Nelson he was working on a highly secret weapon, a reference to the atomic bomb project then in its very early stages. Nelson indicated prior knowledge of the project and advised Lomanitz to be discreet and to consider himself an undercover member of the CPUSA.


iirc FBI said this was first time they learned of the atomic bomb, but Nelson after hearing them said he already knew...

I think just mentioning existence of the project would be enough to go to jail

Nelson told Lomanitz then to "consider himself undercover member of the CPUSA"

what is nature of Lomanitz and Weinberg's recuirtment? where they illegals born and raised in it or "true believers" in communism recruited later? what use would they be to the Soviets? they also had spies like Klauss Fuchs and Rosenbergs


	Military security officials immediately excluded Lomanitz from the Manhattan Project. In 1949 he was called to testify before Congress about atomic espionage and was indicted for contempt after uncooperative testimony but acquitted. David Bohm, who had ignored Oppenheimer's 1943 advice to cut his ties with communism, had also been excluded from work at Los Alamos. In 1949 he refused to answer congressional committee inquiries about his relationship to the CPUSA and was indicted for contempt but acquitted. 


Bohm and Lomanitz didn't listen to Oppenheimer, both tried and acquitted for contempt.


...


https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA121&lpg=PA121&dq=Joseph+Weinberg+soviet+spy&source=bl&ots=RYKrosPBBP&sig=-yQnmtqd5cxTHFCLZ6bxQ7t89ZI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiuhLeL9e7ZAhUG7YMKHVhCCbsQ6AEIbzAP#v=onepage&q=Weinberg&f=false
	Darling stayed at U.S. Rubber but was more helpful in facilitating the KGB's contact with an old graduate school colleague and fellow Communist from the University of Wisconsin, Josepher Weinberg. Born in 1919 in Ney York to Jewish immigrants from Poland, Weinberg grew up in a Communist milieu. Described as a brilliant student, he graudated from the City College of New York (CCNY), moved to Wisconsin for his master's degree, and then migrated to the University of California, Berkeley, in 1939 to study with J. Robert Oppenheimer for his PhD, obtained in 1943.

	On 29 March 1943, an FBI wire tap on the telephone of Steve Nelson (chief of the CPUSA in the San Francisco Bay Area) picked up someone named "Joe" telling Nelson's wife that he had urgent and important information and would come to the house to wait for Nelson's arrival. FBI listening devices collected most of the conversation in the subsequent meeting. "Joe," later identified as Weinberg, and Nelson discussed "the professor," presumably Robert Oppenheimer. Nelson acknowledged that Oppenheimer earlier had told him in general terms about the atomic project but had recently become more reticent. Weinberg indicated that Oppenheimer was also becoming increasingly uncomfortable with his young, radical graduate students, like Weinberg himself. Nelson pressed Weinberg for information about "the project" and asked for a copy of what had already been produced. Weinberg was hesistent, noted that he expected that he would be moving to the new site wehre work on the bomb would be ocnducted, and was concerned that his membership in the CPUSA since 1938 might cause him problems. Nevertheless, he offered a verbal dsecription of the research work being undertaken on the atomic bomb, and the two discussed methods of future contact. Nelson cautioned Weinberg against writing anything down. The next day Nelson called the Soviet consulate and arranged to meet "at the usual place" with Peter Ivanov, a GRU officer operating under diplomatic cover at the consulate. Six days later the two renddezvoused on the grounds of a San Franciso hospital.

	By June 1943 the FBI informed military security officers about Weinberg's meeting with Nelson. They raised the matter with Oppenheimer, and in August he informed Weinberg the latter would not be moving to Los Alamos to take a role in the atomic bomb project. 


is this when Oppenheimer first learned there were spies close to him? this suggests "military security officers" told Oppenheiemer about Weinberg before end of August 1943, and this is why Oppenheimer told Weinberg not to go on Manhatten project. So why did Oppenheimer do this?


http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/opp06.asp
	(6) In 1950, Dr. Oppenheimer told an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation that he had not known Joseph Weinberg to be a member of the Communist Party until that fact become public knowledge. Yet on September 12, 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer told Colonel Lansdale that Weinberg was a Communist Party member (Tr., p. 875).





	...It was not until December 1943, that Dr. Oppenheimer, after being told by General Groves that he would be ordered to divulge the identity of the contact, reported the name of Chevalier. However, the record shows that having been told of the identity of Chevalier by Dr. Oppenheimer, the Manhattan District officials were still of the opinion that Chevalier had contacted three employees on the atomic project.

	Dr. Oppenheimer, in his answer, stated that his friend, Haakon Chevalier, with his wife, visited him at his home on Eagle Hill probably in early 1943. He stated further that during the visit Chevalier came into the kitchen and told him that George Eltenton had spoken to him of the possibility of transmitting technical information to Soviet scientists. Dr. Oppenheimer said that he made some strong remark to the effect that this sounded terribly wrong to him, and the discussion ended there.

	Dr. Oppenheimer's answer further states that nothing in his long-standing friendship would have led him to believe that Chevalier was actually seeking information, and he was certain that Chevalier had no idea of the work on which Dr. Oppenheimer was engaged.

	Dr. Oppenheimer testified that the detailed story of the Chevalier incident which he told to Colonel Pash on August 26, 1943, and affirmed to Colonel Lansdale on September 12, 1943, was false in certain material respects. 'Dr. Oppenheimer testified that this story was "a cock-and-bull story"; that "the whole thing was a pure fabrication except for the one name, Eltenton." He said that his only explanation for lying was that he "was an idiot" and he "was reluctant to mention Chevalier" and "no doubt somewhat reluctant to mention myself." He admitted on cross examination, however, that if the story he told Colonel Pash had been true, it would have shown that Chevalier "was deeply involved"; that it was not just a casual conversation; that Chevalier was not an innocent contact, and that it was a criminal conspiracy.

	Dr. Oppenheimer admitted that if this story to Colonel Pash had been true, it made things look very bad for both Chevalier and himself. He acknowledged that he thought the request for information by Eltenton was "treasonable." He admitted that he knew when he talked to Colonel Pash that his falsification impeded Colonel Pash's investigation.

	Dr. Oppenheimer testified that in June or July of 1946 shortly after Chevalier was interviewed by the FBI about the Eltenton-Chevalier Incident, Chevalier came to Oppenheimer's home in Berkeley and told Oppenheimer about the interview; that Chevalier said the FBI had pressed him about whether he talked to anyone besides Oppenheimer; that quite awhile later Dr. Oppenheimer was interviewed by the FBI about the same matter, and at this time he knew from Chevalier substantially what Chevalier had said to the FBI about the incident.


Sep 1943 inteview with Lt Col. Lansdale (seems sketchy: http://spartacus-educational.com/COLDlansdale.htm , maybe better around time of Vietnam? hard to say... Ellsberg worked for him too! weird guy. sounds like agentura in Oppenheimer interview)

https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XVI%20Oppenheimer.pdf






	....During a series of encounters Oppenheimer berated several of his former graduate students for their Communist political activities. Weinberg then mailed a package that the FBI intercepted 




-----


https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XV%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 92

says someone (I think investigators?) suspected Weinberg as the contact mentioned by Oppenheimer


pg 108

questioning Pash:


	Q Colonel, did any incident or episode occur shortly after your interview with Dr. Oppenheimer which tended to confirm your doubts about Dr. Oppenheimer?

	A There was an incident which caused me to stop and think. The evaluation was difficult, but the timing and coincidence was an important factor. Josepher Weinberg wrote a note to a man, a Flanigan, also a known Communist, stating -- in the letter, it was a card, hd did not it, but it was in the letter which he mailed, stating, "Dar A. Please don't contact me"< or something to that effect. I can't recall. "Please don't make any contact with me, and pass this message to S and B, only don't mention any names." I will take a walk with you when this matter is all cleared up. That was dated the 6th of September of course we were very concerend over the entire situation and sicne Weinberg had close contact and association with Dr. Oppenheimr I felt at the time that it was the result of the situation which culminated in my interview with Dr. Oppenheimer.


pg 116

	Q I think you siad that another reason you connected was because of Dr. Weinberg's close contact and association with Dr. oppenheimer. Would you tell us so far as you know what Dr. Weinberg's association with Dr. Oppenheimer was?

	A Yes. He was a student of Dr. Oppenheimer's at the University. In two, I think, instances when problems arose for him on one instance he went with Bohm to see Dr. Oppenheimer. That was on the 2nd of September, in connection with the Lomanitz situation. And from the conversations that were had in the group, my impression was that he discussed Dr. Oppenheimer as sort of a man they could advise with. I recall that was not the 2nd of September. It may have been during Dr. Oppenheimer's trip to San Francisco that Bohm and Weinberg saw him on which they said they also feel that the draft may reach them, too.

	Q They also felt, too what -- the draft?

	A The draft may reach them because of their activities.


Did Oppenheimer think his students were going to get drafted into the military because they were Communists?


	Q Would you try to identify the approximate time of this? You say you think it was not September?

	A No, if I am not mistaken it was during the trip of Dr. Oppenheimer to San Francisco.

	Q When was that?

	A It was in those dates of 26th of 27th of August.

	Q So that too was about ten days before?

	A Yes.

	Q Did Lt Johnson go to Dr. Oppenheimr and question him about Eltenton or did Dr. Oppenheimr come to Lt. Johnson?

	A As Lt Johnson related it to me, I don't know, he said Dr. Oppenheimr told me. I don't know the details of where they met or what the circumstances surrounding that was.


didn't he tell Lansdale before too?

I guess this happened in weeks after Weinberg and Bohm came to Dr. Oppnehimer while some weird espionage stuff was going on

a guess: Oppenheimer getting suspicious and starting to mention unusual activities of his students or people in lab, they decide to counter with getting him in perjury

Oppenheimer mentions a meeting where Weinberg and Lomonitz came to him worried they were going to be framed

when was this, meeting with Weinberg and Bohm, and why?


------

https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20IV%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 107

	Q How did you come to know Dr. Weinberg?

	A In the most normal way. I knew all the graduate students who studied Theoretical Physics in the Department of Physics in Berkely. I believe I called them all by their first names.


Didn't Oppenheimer advise Weinberg's PH.D?

goes on to say had dinner with Weinberg and his wife "once or twice"


------

https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20V%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 144

		
	Q Dr. Oppenheimer has testified to a visit that he paid Jean Tatlock in 1943 on a trip away from the project. Dr. Oppenheimer knew that he was under surveillance like everybody else when he left the project, did he not?

	A I assume that he did. We never told him. But I assume he realized it...


significance of Tatlock visit?

timing in 1943 with also these meetings with Weinberg, Bohm, Lomonitz, Nelson in 1942 (pg 113 https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20IV%20Oppenheimer.pdf
) looks bad with the intrigues going on around that time.

all these end up getting cited in Oppenheimer security hearings

essentially they built leverage over him, just by this meetings. Kindof reminds me of all the news of meetings in "Russia investigation" today


pg 160

	Q Was a man named Weinberg on your suspect list?

	A Right at the top of the list.

	Q In fact, Weinberg gave information to Steve nelson, didn't he?

	A That is our belief. We proved to our satisfaction that he gave information to Steve Nelson for money.


motive money? need to be careful with that...


pg 188 on Weinberg and Bohm meeting with Oppenheimer, something about Lomanitz being drafted

"Oppenheimer told them that if they had continued to adhere to the promise made by them to him that they would cease all political activities, including Communist Party activities, then they had nothing to fear."

wasn't it more than that? I think he told them something like "don't spy"


-----


this is what was going on with Lomanitz:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giovanni_Rossi_Lomanitz
	His father was an agricultural chemist and named his son after the Italian socialist Giovanni Rossi, who had founded an agricultural commune in Brazil in the 1890s. Lomanitz graduated from high school at age 14 and went on to earn his bachelor of science degree in physics from the University of Oklahoma and his doctorate in theoretical physics from Cornell University under Richard Feynman.

	...In the early 1940s Lomanitz started graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley. While there, he became a protégé of the physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer. Lomanitz worked at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory on a new method of electromagnetic separation of isotopes. Lomanitz's graduate research was cut short when he was drafted into the Army during World War II.

	During the period 1942-45 Oppenheimer was responsible for the employment on the atomic bomb project of Lomanitz. Oppenheimer urged him to work on the Manhattan Project, although Oppenheimer later told government security personnel that he knew Lomanitz had been very much of a "red" when he first came to the University of California. Oppenheimer said he told Lomanitz that he must forgo all political activity if he came onto the project. In August 1943, Oppenheimer protested against the termination of Lomanitz's military deferment and requested that he be returned to the project after his entry into the military service.

	While at the Radiation Laboratory, Lomanitz helped to establish a local chapter of the Federation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists, and Technicians (FAECT), a small white-collar CIO union.

	The Federal Bureau of Investigation had placed a listening device in the residence of Communist Party activist Steve Nelson, and in October 1942 overheard a man referred to as "Joe", whom the FBI suspected of being Lomanitz's close friend Joseph Weinberg, describing to Nelson the significance and technical outlines of the secret nuclear research done at Berkeley. Future spying for the Soviet Union was implied. This led the United States Government to push Weinberg, Lomanitz, and David Bohm out of the program.


I think Lomanitz was first forced out after Nelson case? First Weinberg and Lomanitz came saying they think Lomanitz being framed, THen Weinberg and Bohm come to his office asking for advice and what to do about Lomantiz draft deferrment being canceled

did they want Oppenheimer to speak out for Lomanitz?


atomic heritage account:

https://www.atomicheritage.org/profile/giovanni-rossi-lomanitz
	Concerned by his radical organizing and close friendship with suspected Soviet spy Joseph Weinberg, the Counter-Intelligence Corps ensured that he was drafted into military service, to prevent him from having access to information that he could potentially pass on to the Soviet government. 

	Suspicion would follow Lomanitz even after the war. After appearing before the House Un-American Activity Committee and vociferously defending his loyalty to the United States, he was indicted for contempt in 1949. Although he was eventually acquitted in 1951, the legal proceedings decimated his career. He was fired from his teaching position at Fisk University and worked in menial labor for much of the rest of the 50s. He would not receive another job in academia until 1962. 



Spies: The Rise and Fall of the KGB in America account:

https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA121&lpg=PA121&dq=Joseph+Weinberg+soviet+spy&source=bl&ots=RYKrosPBBP&sig=-yQnmtqd5cxTHFCLZ6bxQ7t89ZI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiuhLeL9e7ZAhUG7YMKHVhCCbsQ6AEIbzAP#v=onepage&q=Joseph%20Weinberg%20soviet%20spy&f=false
	FBI listening devices in Nelson's residence had not only overheard Weinberg discussing the atomic bomb but had also in October 1942 overhead another young Berkeley physicist, Giovanna Rossi Lomanitz, tell Nelson he was working on a highly secret weapon, a reference to the atomic bomb project then in its very early stages. Nelson indicated prior knowledge of the project and advised Lomanitz to be discreet and to consider himself an undercover member of the CPUSA.


Maybe Lomanitz was set up in a way? either way telling that to Nelson would be treason.

Lomanitz was young (22 and the time), had promising career, and now about to be drafted. Maybe Oppenheimer would have a soft spot for him? But testified that he told Weinberg (and Bohm?) that he didn't think Lomantiz was being framed.


http://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/opp01.asp
	The Board finds further that in August 1943, Dr. Oppenheimer protested against the termination of Lomanitz' deferment and urgently requested that he be returned to the project after his entry into the military service. It appears from the testimony that Dr. Oppenheimer first learned of the impending induction of Lomanitz in a letter from Dr. E. U. Condon who wrote to him "About it in a great sense of outrage."


Oppenheimer upset at Lomanitz draft punishment, asked for him to be returned to the project.


	...It must be said that Dr. Oppenheimer seems to have had a high degree of discretion reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself vital secrets. However, we do find suggestions of a tendency to be coerced, or at least influenced in conduct over a period of years.

	By his own testimony, Dr. Oppenheimer was led to protest the induction into military service of Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz in 1943 by the outraged intercession of Dr. Condon. It is to be remembered that, at this time Dr. Oppenheimer knew of Lomanitz's connections and of his indiscretions. In 1949, Dr. Oppenheimer appeared in executive session before the House Un-American Activities Committee, and at that time was asked about his friend, Dr. Bernard Peters. Dr. Oppenheimer confirmed the substance of an interview with the security officer which took place during the war years and in which he had characterized Dr. Peters as a dangerous Red and former Communist. This testimony soon appeared in the Rochester, N. Y., newspapers. At this time. Dr. Peters was on the staff of the University of Rochester. Dr. Oppenheimer, as a result of protestations by Dr. Condon, by Dr. Peters himself, and by other scientists, then wrote a letter for publication to the Rochester newspaper, which, in effect, repudiated his testimony given in secret session. His testimony before this Board indicated that he failed to appreciate the great impropriety of making statements of one character in a secret session and of a different character for publication, and that he believed that the important thing was to protect Dr. Peters' professional status. In that episode, Dr. Condon's letter, which has appeared in the press, contained a severe attack on Dr. Oppenheimer. Nevertheless, he now testifies that he is prepared to support Dr. Condon in the loyalty investigation of the latter.


board said Oppenheimer protested Lomanitz draft and Peters losing job under influence of Condon


	...Whether the incidents referred to clearly indicate a susceptibility to influence or coercion within the meaning of the criteria or whether they simply reflect very bad judgment, they clearly raise the question of Dr. Oppenheimer's understanding, acceptance, and enthusiastic support of the security system. Beginning with the Chevalier incident, he has repeatedly exercised an arrogance of his own judgment with respect to the loyalty and reliability of other citizens to an extent which has frustrated and at times impeded the workings of the system.


	...Loyalty to one's friends is one of the noblest of qualities. Being loyal to one's friends above reasonable obligations to the country and to the security system, however, is not clearly consistent with the interests of security.

	We are aware that in these instances Dr. Oppenheimer may have been sincere in his interpretation that the security interests of the country were not disserved; we must, however, take a most serious view of this kind of continuing judgment.


basically his commie friends screwed him over



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=DdIJAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA331&lpg=PA331&dq=Manhattan+Lomanitz&source=bl&ots=embpOsjJ70&sig=ooaR8lbqTMrehrBx27mS8DcDBtE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjttqHTyu_ZAhURMawKHSMiCOMQ6AEIUDAG#v=onepage&q=Nelson&f=false


this has HUAC hearings including Lomanitz



-----


https://books.google.com/books?id=FE6NDQAAQBAJ&pg=PA355&dq=oppenheimer+Weinberg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjMq5Wt0e_ZAhVMYK0KHcsrC2cQ6AEIKTAA#v=onepage&q=oppenheimer%20Weinberg&f=false
	...told Nelson, was already being biult in Tennessee that was expected to emplyo thousands of people, the separation method being "preferably that of the magnetic spectrograph with electrical and magnetic focusing." Toward the end of the conversation Weinberg discussed with Nelson how he might be able to provide information in the future via his sister, who lived in New York, and Nelson emphasized how important it was not to put anything in writing.

	The conversation left now doubt at all that Weinberg was willing, indeed eager, to play an important role in Soviet espionage. And though the FBI did not yet know who "Joe" was, they did know that he was an ex-sudent of Oppenheimer's. That much was clear from the conversation, in which Oppenheimr was mentioned several times, usually referred to as "the professor." Pash clearly thought the mere fact that Oppenheimer was associated with two people plotting espionage would be enough to establish him as a security risk, but in fact the FBI notes of the conversation provide pretty good grounds for thinking that Oppenheimr was *not* a risk. Whenever "the professor" came up in the conversation, either Nelson or Weinberg (or both) made some comment to the effect that he had cut his links to the Party and that he was emphatically not prepared to pass on secrets to the Soviet Union.

	At one point, Nelson remarked that Oppenheimer was "very much worried now and we make him feel uncomfortable," to which Weinberg responded by saying that Oppenheimer kept him off the project becaue he was worried that he would "attract more attention" and also because "he fears that I will propagandize."


This makes it sound like Oppenheimer was a spy


	Oppenheimer, Weinberg told Nelson, had "changed a bit ... You won't believe the change that has taken place." Nelson agreed, saying: "To my sorrow, his wife is influencing him in the wrong direction." Evidently on the basis of his recent farewell lunch with Oppenheimer, Nelson told Wienberg that Oppenheimer, encouraged by this wife, was keen to dissociate himself from his former colleagues in the Communist Party, because he did not want to threaten his central role in the important project to which he had been recruited.


Weinberg told Nelson Oppenheimer "changed", wife influencing him "in wrong direction" to dissasociate with former communist colleagues


	Even if it did not implicate Oppenheimer, this conversation between Weinberg and Nelson provided irrefutable evidence of a threat to the security of a top-secret military project, and, as such, it was taken very seriously indeed by the FBI, to whom "Joe's" information was as much a revelation as it was to Nelson. The FBI immediately delivered a transcript of the conversation to Colonel Pash, whose response was to fly to Washington to tell Groves and Landsdale that he had evidence of Oppenheimer's involvement in espionage.



http://www.washingtondecoded.com/site/2012/02/jro.html

this paints Oppenheimer as a Soviet agent who decided to stop, supported by the FBI transcript of Nelson and Weinberg's conversation


any truth to that? Oppenheimer's life shows transition from supporting communism and trusting agents around him to distrusting them and getting in fights with them and being dissillusioned with the soviets

then after the Manhatten project see all these people befriending him like Kennan, maybe giving him ideas

did Oppenheimer ever at some point intend to steal secrets for the Soviets? He says he thought they should have it but that he balked at doing it for them, Chevallier tried to push him to do it but as far as can be seen he never did. Guess after this they punished him for it (and/or other things?)

another guess: if they couldn't get him to give secrets willingly, maybe wanted to get more leverage on him? The communist suspicions and investigations, lying around him would help them with that. Kindof similar to Flynn--had contacts with hostile spies then lied about it, so they'd have blackmail on him. So Nelson case, interview about Chevalier could be part of a shift in strategy.



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=jfSn2RJZI9EC&pg=PA167&dq=oppenheimer+Weinberg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjMq5Wt0e_ZAhVMYK0KHcsrC2cQ6AEIOjAD#v=onepage&q=oppenheimer%20Weinberg&f=false


on relationship between Weinberg and Oppenheimer (by Bird and Sherwin)


-----


https://books.google.com/books?id=BTUwAAAAQBAJ&pg=PT140&dq=oppenheimer+Weinberg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjMq5Wt0e_ZAhVMYK0KHcsrC2cQ6AEIRTAF#v=onepage&q=oppenheimer%20Weinberg&f=false

I think this is saying Oppenheimer's meeting with Tatlock happened shortly after the Nelson Weinberg meeting?

started investgiating Oppenheimer and puzzling over weird communist things he was doing

"Pash warned Washington that the Los Alamos director was deliberately luring left-wing associates to the lab. Pash even hinted to Landsale that Opppie might have agreed to work on the bom just so he could give it to the Russians."


	Aware the Groves seemd committed to Oppenheimer, Pash broached with Lansdale the possibility of gradually easing Oppie out of his job at Los Alamos and replacing him with another scientist. The FBI's Whitson also raised the question of firing Oppenheimer. Groves, however, would have none of it, as Pash and the bureau learned from the project's head of security: "Landsdale stated that General Groves claims fltalty that Oppenheimer is irreplaceable and that if anything  happened to Oppenheimer, the project would be set back at least six months." Moreover, Groves had argued, such a delay could be catastrophic--since recent intelligence showed that the Germans were laying new high-tension wires, leading the army to conclude that the Nazis might be building their own Calutrons.


this might be worth looking into more


...


https://books.google.com/books?id=BTUwAAAAQBAJ&pg=PT140&dq=oppenheimer+Weinberg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjMq5Wt0e_ZAhVMYK0KHcsrC2cQ6AEIRTAF#v=onepage&q=oppenheimer%20Weinberg&f=false
	...At the FBI's San Francisco field office late in 1942, Robert King, the bureau's "one-man commie squad," was puzzled by Oppenheimer's suddenyl frenetic travel schedule. Since the conversation intercepted in Steve Nelson's office that October, Oppie had become a subject or renewed interest to the buearu.


A Nelson bug intercept in October 1942 made oppenheimer "renewed interest" for FBI

goes on to say Pash fought in White army in Russian civil war, "his father was the senior bishop of the Russian Orthodox Church in America." later ended up in U.S. military intelligence in WW2


	...Pash abruptly told King that he had "no cognizance" of any military project across the Bay. Disgusted, King asked the agent he had assigned to shadow Oppenheimer to draft a report on the physicist Peiper sent the eighteen-page report to Hooever on Feburary 10, 1943, and also had a copy hande-delievered to Pash at the presidio.

	The FBI director promptly forwarded Oppenheimer's file and an accompanying report on FAECT to G-2 headquarters in Washington. Hooever warned the army that a major effort was under way by the radical union to recruit "progressive' applicants" to spy upon an unknown secret project at the Rad Lab.


Hoover and Pash associates muckraking Oppenheimr as early as Feb 10 1943

The had bugged Nelson's house for awhile, and picked up Weinberg and Nelson talking about Oppenheimer in March 1943

https://www.osti.gov/includes/opennet/includes/Oppenheimer%20hearings/Vol%20XV%20Oppenheimer.pdf

pg 108

	Q How did you interpret the expression "take a walk with you"?

	A The Communist people at the time were trying to avoid any dicussions. They tried to carry on their discussinos either outside or in an automobile or out on the street.

	Q Why?

	A In order to avoid detection. They avoided fixed positions.


It was Weinberg writing "will take a walk," and Pash saying this was communist practice

a lot weird with these wiretaps

why couldn't they get a warrant? why did they talk about something like the head of the Manhattan project at Los Alamos as if her were their project or expected something out of him in an insecure location?

https://books.google.com/books?id=BTUwAAAAQBAJ&pg=PT140&dq=oppenheimer+Weinberg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjMq5Wt0e_ZAhVMYK0KHcsrC2cQ6AEIRTAF#v=onepage&q=oppenheimer%20Weinberg&f=false
	...Ironically, the suddent interest in Oppenheimer had set off a turf war between the army and the bureau. General Strong's response to Hoover's warning had been to ask the FBI to cease its surveillance of the physicist--who, as Strong pointed out, was now the army's, not the bureau's, responsibility. Believing that the bug in Steve Nelson's office had shown Oppenheimer complicit in espionage, however, the FBI director was reluctant to abandon his quarry. Thus, while Hoover dutifully instructed Peiper to close the file on Oppenheimer, he simultaneously approved the agent's plan for a new offensive aimed at uncovering Soviet spies in Berkely.

	...A scant two weeks later, on March 29, 1943, the bureau's bug in Steve Nelson's home yeileded the first hard evidence of espionage against the Manhattan Project. William Branigan was the FBI agent whom King had assigned the wiretap.


row between Hoover and army, Hoover closes Oppenheimer file but still wants to investigate, drops but aproved new Berekely espionage project, two weeks later get Weinberg convo on Oppenheimr from Nelson bug on March 29, 1943.

	
	...Branigan's ntoes recored Nelson's delicate effort to coax more information from Joe:

	Steve: "Joe, I'd like to ask you, would it be possible for you to give this elementary thing that's already been published, you know?"

	Joe: "Uh, huh." Long pause.

	Steve: "Could I get a copy of that?"

	Joe: "The one that's published you mean?"

	Steve: "Yeah. Is that possible?"

	Joe: Long pause. "Now, wait just a second." Pauses. "it's natural I'm a little bit scared, because..." (trails off)


	Joe worried that his Communist background--he had been a member of the party since 1938, he told Steve--would cause him to come under scrutiny by the project's investigators. Steve said that he had already been told something about the project by the professor: "What the nature of it is--as much as that." But his informant had been reluctant to discuss the subject, and Nelson had decided not to pressure him.

	Finally, Joe gave in. Lowering his voice, he dictated in whispers while Nelson--and Branigan--took notes. The FBI agent strained to hear but was only able to catch and write down snippets: "Separation method is preferably that of the magnetic spectrograph with electrical and magnetic focusing, or less preferably, that of the velocity selector.... spehere 5 centimeters in diamter with material ... dueteriu.... this design is tentative and is being experimeinted upon."

	...Nelson again cautioned Joe not to put anything in writing.


this makes it sound like Weinberg was more of a dupe


goes on to describe Nelson bug of nelson meeting with Zubilin

	...The bug in Nelson's house picked up the Russian counting out bills or bundles of currency, and Branigan recorded this exchange:

		Nelson: "Jesus, you count money like a banker."
		Unkown man: "Well, after all, I told (deleted), I used to pay out at Russia."


Is this where Pash got "they were motivated by money" idea?


	...Nelson said that he had been recruited at the end of 1942 by "a man from Moscow" and that Earl Browder, the head of the Communist Party of the United States, was aware of and supported his mission. He was miffed, nelson said, that Soviet officials had begun short-circuiting the established apparatus by recruiting rank-and-file members of the party to spy, and instructing them not to inform party superiors of their assignements. Nelson suggested that the Soviets instead choose a trustworthy comrade in every important city or state and allow that person to handle contacts with the local spies. He proposed himself as the contact in the Bay Area.


Nelson was a Spanish civil war veteran--was he actually recruited in 1942?

wiki says he "achieved public notoriety as the political commissar of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in the Spanish Civil War"

born Stjepan Mesaros

"Stjepan Mesaros (sometimes as "Stephen Mesarosh") was born in Subocka, Croatia on January 1, 1903 of ethnic Hungarian extraction.[1] The Communist Party of the United States would later claim he was born in Steelton, Pennsylvania.[1]"

"In 1931, Nelson and his wife were sent to Moscow for two years at the International Lenin School. He became a courier for the Communist International (Comintern), delivering documents and funds to Germany, Switzerland and China. In 1933, they returned to the United States and settled in Wilkes-Barre.[1]"

sounds like dude was an illegal

"sword and sheild" says this meeting with Zarubin was the one that Hopkins gave "friendly warning" to Soviets about (book says Hoover sent Hopkins a memo about it)


	...The conversations intercepted by the FBI put a prompt end to the battle between the army and the bureau. On April 5, 1943, G-2's Strong acknowleged to Hooever that the military was engaged in a secret "experimental program." The following morning, Hoover's personal assistant, D. Milton "Mickey" Ladd, and the FBI's foremost Soviet expert, Lish Whitson, met with Lansdale and Groves in the general's office at the New War Department Buliding. Without disclosing its goal--he spoke only of producing an unidentified "material"--Groves outlined the scope, cost and significance of the Manhattan Project, adding, in notes taken by Ladd: "General Groves advised that which ever country got the material first would win the war and could dictate the terms of the peace. He further said that if switzerland could make only so much of the material as would fill a small room, Switzerland could rule the world."

	...The FBI intercepts also galvanized the army into action. The day before his meeting with the burea, Landsdale had submitted detailed plans for a major counterinteligence effort in the Bay Area; Strong now approved it immediately.

	With the cooperation of the Rad Lab's personell director, Lyall Johnson placed army undercover agents on the research staff. One, an engineer, joined the local chapter of the FAECT. Another secret informant, a secretary at the lab, reported to the amry on particular people and events up on the hill.

	...Under the arragmeent agreed to between Hoever and Strong, the army focused upon university employees under contract to the Manhattan Project, while the bureau concentrated upon known or suspected Communists with connections to the Rad Lab.


Meanwhile, the NSA knew about Fuchs and Rosenbergs the whole time under Venona...

It looks like spies caught in Venona weren't close to Oppenheimer? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_spies


	...As its surveillance effort grew, the army rented a two-story house on Forest Avenue, a few blocks south of the Berkely campus, to serve as a listening post. An undercover agent and his family lived downstairs; upstrairs, in a back room, officers assigned to the Military Intelligence Division's Counter-Intelligence COrps (CIC) recorded the telephone calls of selected Rad Lab employees. (On an early inspection visit, Groes nearly comrpomised the operation by arriving at the house in full uniform. Belatedly realizing that the neighbors might wonder what an army general was doing ther,e he wrapped himslef in the diminutive Pash's raincoat and dashed back to his car.)

	Landsdale ordered Pash to launch his own investigations at Berkeley--not realizing that the eager counterspy already had one under way.

	Pash did not have to be persuded that Oppenheimer was a security threat. Under the pretext of protecting Oppenheimr against Axis assassins, he had earlier assinged the physicst a pair of bodyguards, who repoted regularly on Oppie's activities. (Oppenheimer, however, foiled the eavesdroppers by keeping the back windows of the car open and by speaking in whipsers.)


sounds like Oppenheimer distrusted Pash some time before the interview

what did the bodyguards do?


	A few weeks before, Pash had orderd a young MID lieutenant assigned to the Presido, Peer de Silva, to being a personal investigation of Oppenheimer. De Silva, just two years out of West Point, quickly came to share Pash's suspicion that Oppie was a Soviet agent.



	* * *


	Despite the army's efforts, it would be another two months before "Joe" was identified. The break in the case came about purely by chance. Early in June, a commercial photographer stationed near Sather Gate snapped a picture of Rossi Lomanitz arm-in-arm with David Bohm, Max Friedman, and Joe Weinberg. After the group left, an army undercover agent standing nearby purchased the negative.

	Severl days later, CICI agents followed Lomanitz, Friedman, and Weinberg hom to Berkeley from San Franciso, where the trio and a woman friend had attended a celebration in honor of Soviet writer Maxim Gorki. The address on Blake Street was passed along to Johnosn, whose check of personnel records at the lab showed an exact match between Winberg's background and that of "Joe." Army investigators also located a handwritten note that Weinerg had written to Oppenheimer on April 12--two weeks after Joe's meeting with Nelson, and only two days before Weinberg filled out the required security questionnaire at the Rad Lab--indicating that he was already involved in the bomb project and eager to do more.


dunno what to make of this

around this time Oppenheimer put Weinberg to work on Manhattan project

	Oppie had put Weinberg to work on magnetic field calculations--making a science out of what, for Lawrence, had been the art of focusing the cyclotron beam with iron shims. Despite Oppenheimer's earliy reservations about hiring Weinberg, the urgent need to get the Calutrons running had short-cirtuied caution and the lba's rudimentary security procedures.


how did Oppenheimer come about to deciding to hire Weinberg? says had reservations at first by there was an "urgent need" to get something working


after this they are following Oppenheimer and he meets Tatlock

so this puts it in context: Tatlock "needing" him ended up screwing him over and making him look like he's doing secret communist meetings at the height of investigations by the FBI and Army intel on soviet spies


Oppie was married at the time. They probably figured he'd lie about the meeting. He'd either have to lie or admit that he was having an affair, lose-lose for him. Think he made the better choice though.


------


Oppenheimer brought a gaggle of communist left-wing Berkely physicists to the Manhattan project whom the FBI, army, HUAC and media (I think?) wasted a bunch of time investigating. Meanwhile, the real spies were different people.


The other spies (Rosenberg, Fuchs) were Communist Party members too


which was most important spy? a lot say Fuchs


this is interesting from 2009:

https://www.usnews.com/news/national/articles/2009/01/02/new-evidence-of-a-soviet-spy-in-the-us-nuclear-program
	In a new book, two former nuclear weapons scientists make the case that Soviet spies didn't just steal atomic secrets from the Manhattan Project in the 1940s—something historians have known for years—but say a previously unknown spy also helped the Soviets design their first hydrogen bomb. The Soviet Union detonated its first thermonuclear bomb in 1953, only a year after the first American H-bomb was tested, ending the period of nuclear supremacy the U.S. military enjoyed after World War II.

	In The Nuclear Express: A Political History of the Bomb and Its Proliferation, published this month, Danny Stillman and Thomas Reed, two longtime veterans of the U.S. nuclear weapons program, do not provide the name of the spy they say took hydrogen bomb secrets out of the Los Alamos, N.M., weapons lab. But they do offer some of his biography, saying he was born in the United States, raised abroad, came under the sway of the Communist Party in the 1930s, and took a job at Los Alamos during World War II.

	Stillman and Reed say in the book that they have refused to reveal the name of the suspected spy, who is now dead, because he "can neither defend his family name nor refute our arguments." They say his name doesn't really matter, anyway: "His fingerprints are what count."

	Stillman, a physicist who worked at Los Alamos from 1965 until 2000, says he tried to make a case against the scientist in the 1990s, going to the FBI after he noticed the man's apparent wealth. The local Santa Fe office bungled the investigation, the authors say, and the inquiry was "botched beyond recognition." The FBI eventually became distracted by the modern-day spy scandal surrounding Wen Ho Lee, another scientist working at Los Alamos, and stopped pursuing the case, the authors say.


whoever it was I guess still alive in 90s (Oppenheimer died in 67)


	As the Cold War faded into memory, the authors say they began to get their first real confirmation that the Soviet H-bomb effort had help from someone inside the American nuclear program. In particular, they say Russian scientists told them at a meeting in the late 1990s that the Soviet bomb designer, Andrei Sakharov, had privately refused to take full credit for the hydrogen bomb. The Russians hinted that Sakharov knew he'd gotten a boost from someone in the American program.

	Former Soviet weapons experts have also said they were given a copy of an early design drawing of a "radiation implosion," the technology used in hydrogen bombs, that appeared to have been sketched in the early 1950s by an American H-bomb designer. The document was apparently stolen or copied and found its way to the Soviets. Stillman and Reed say there is only one way this kind of information could have ended up in Soviet hands: a spy.


yet they say Oppenheimer a Soviet spy for opposing the H-bomb program


	Most historians seem to be leery of Stillman's and Reed's conclusions, barring more hard evidence. But they say the notion of a Soviet spy inside the early American atomic program isn't so far-fetched. There is little doubt, in fact, that the Soviets' first nuclear weapon—a plutonium bomb like the one dropped on Nagasaki, Japan—was the result of espionage. "We know now that their first design was a carbon-copy of the 'Fat-Man,' " Robert Norris, a researcher at the Natural Resources Defense Council and the author of Racing for the Bomb: General Leslie Groves, the Manhattan Project's Indispensable Man, said in an interview earlier this year.

	Nearly a dozen Soviet spies—including Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Klaus Fuchs—were executed or imprisoned after World War II for passing atomic secrets to the Soviets, including information about the plutonium bomb and the early work on the hydrogen bomb. Last year, Vladimir Putin, then Russia's president, shocked American historians and government officials alike when he announced that an undetected spy, George Koval, had also penetrated the Manhattan Project.


Koval important?


	Putin said Koval, an Iowa-born son of Russian Jewish immigrants, had provided the Soviets with information about American atomic production levels while working at nuclear facilities in Oak Ridge, Tenn., and Dayton, Ohio. Koval moved back to Russia in the 1950s and died in 2006. He was posthumously awarded the Hero of Russia medal.

	There was widespread paranoia in the United States throughout the 1950s about the possibility of Soviet espionage, and these new revelations certainly seem to indicate that not all of it was unjustified. There is little doubt, of course, that the Red Scare—with the prodding of Sen. Joseph McCarthy—cast its net too wide in its frantic attempts to find communist sympathizers. No atomic bomb secrets leaked from blacklisted movie stars, after all. There is also no evidence that Robert Oppenheimer, the director of the Manhattan Project, ever provided assistance to the Soviets, though he was controversially stripped of his security clearance while overseeing the development of the hydrogen bomb.

	If Stillman and Reed are right, though, there were some who did aid the Soviets. And it may have taken only one man in the right place to help them build their bomb.


-----
