

http://www.nytimes.com/1996/09/28/world/pavel-sudoplatov-89-dies-top-soviet-spy-who-accused-oppenheimer.html
	Published by Little, Brown & Company in 1994, ''Special Tasks'' caused a sensation because of the general's detailed assertions that the Soviet Union had obtained atomic secrets with the aid of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the director of the Manhattan Project's laboratory at Los Alamos, N.M., and Niels Bohr, Enrico Fermi and Leo Szilard, three other physicists with central roles in the development of the atomic bomb.


Sudoplatov accused Szilard along with Oppenheimer, Fermi and Bohr

Oppenheimer accusation is dubious--even if her were a spy at one point, seems clear he opposed Soviets and created a lot of trouble for them, and that they opposed him with a "carefully orchestrated takedown" (ad Jogalakar puts it)


	...The general's assertions outraged many American scientists, some of whom cited examples of what they said were unambiguous and provable errors of fact. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said after a 1995 investigation that it had found no ''credible evidence'' to back up the general's claims. The Russian Foreign Intelligence Service agreed, stating that General Sudoplatov's allegations ''do not correspond to reality.'' The Schecters stood by their work, however.


I thought FBI only said that about Oppenheimer?

maybe not:


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1995/05/02/fbi-says-evidence-lacking-against-a-bomb-scientists/0d7a7606-ea04-495e-bedd-b54b0d790267/	
	FBI SAYS EVIDENCE LACKING AGAINST A-BOMB SCIENTISTS
	By David Streitfeld May 2, 1995

	The FBI does not have "any credible evidence" that four top scientists on the U.S. atom bomb project secretly helped the Soviets 50 years ago, FBI Director Louis J. Freeh said in a letter released yesterday.

	In fact, said Freeh, the bureau has classified information "that argues against" the allegations made last year in "Special Tasks" by former Soviet spymaster Pavel Sudoplatov. The book caused a furor by asserting that Niels Bohr, Enrico Fermi, Robert Oppenheimer and Leo Szilard provided the Soviets with information for their atom bomb program.

	The FBI reviewed its files at the request of the president's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board. At a news conference yesterday, board chairman Les Aspin cautioned that "this is not proof. The issue is proving a negative, and it's very difficult if not impossible to prove a negative."


article saying similar by James Risen:

http://articles.latimes.com/1995-05-02/news/mn-61373_1_atomic-bomb

from Venona Secrets book:

https://books.google.com/books?id=TrlRaHFHspsC&pg=PT220&lpg=PT220&dq=%22is+not+in+possession+of+any+credible+evidence+that+would+suggest+that+Niels%22&source=bl&ots=FWGpad0PeJ&sig=mbRzxQakrUkOIvDiZB7ASANT6cI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwibsMPnu_bZAhWl14MKHTxpAYYQ6AEIJzAA#v=onepage&q=%22is%20not%20in%20possession%20of%20any%20credible%20evidence%20that%20would%20suggest%20that%20Niels%22&f=false
	"The FBI is not in possession of any credible evidence that would suggest that Neils Bohr, Enrico Fermi, Robert Oppenheimer, or Leo Szilard engaged in any espionage activity on behalf of any foreign power to include that involving atomic bomb secrets. Indeed, the FBI has classified information available that argues against the conclusions reached by the author of Special Tasks. The FBI, therefore, considers such allegations to be unfounded."




...


http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1994/09/22/were-the-atom-scientists-spies-an-exchange/


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_Tasks
	It is a somewhat problematic work for several reasons. For one, it was based in large part on Sudoplatov's memory, 40 years or more after the events which form the bulk of the book. For another, it was written with the help of his son Anatoli and two American writers, Jerrold and Leona Schecter, with Sudoplatov's contributions being a series of interviews, which the others turned into a book. Finally, the Schecters have produced other works on this topic which are problematic.

	...The controversy around the atomic information charges led to questions about who had written the book, and whether Sudoplatov had deliberately made misrepresentations.

	A number of parties, including Russia's own Foreign Intelligence Service, contended that Sudoplatov exaggerated his own role when writing his autobiography. 


Cairncross (who was outed as a Soviet spy) and the special tasks wikipedia article attack Sudoplatov and his memior, but do a bad job of it



http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-pavel-sudaplatov-1365781.html
	Obituary: Pavel Sudaplatov

    Jeanne Vronskaya
    Sunday 29 September 1996 23:02 BST
    0 comments


on the other hand, here's his obituary being written a year later...


https://www.stormfront.org/forum/t939713/


someone plugging it on stormfront...


...


https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/book-review-russias-ballistic-missives-special-tasks-the-memoirs-of-an-unwanted-witness-a-soviet-1411408.html
	The allegations against Oppenheimer, Fermi and Szilard are that they 'shared atomic secrets' with the Soviet Union; that they 'helped us place moles' at Manhattan Project factories, and that they enabled moles to copy important documents. How is this substantiated? Sudoplatov's account is rich in personalities, places and dates relating to agents such as Klaus Fuchs, whose stories are already in the public domain, but oddly, when he comes to his three most glamorous and most highly-placed contacts, he can remember no telling details or anecdotes.

	With Oppenheimer, we are given a list of agents who contacted him, but no evidence of anything specific after December 1941, when the US had barely entered the war. Far more about his Communist sympathies and friends emerged at the 1954 hearings which led to the removal of his security clearance, but even that fell short of proving he was a spy.

	As for Fermi, Sudoplatov links him closely with Bruno Pontecorvo, who defected to Moscow in 1950 and is generally acknowledged to have been a spy. But again, there is nothing new or specific. In the case of Szilard, all we are told is that his secretary passed on information.


says multiple Soviet agents contacted Oppenheimer, sounds right

says Fermi linked closely with Bruno Pontecorvo

says Szliard's secretary passed information 


...

https://www.atomicheritage.org/profile/pavel-sudoplatov
	Sudoplatov also asserted, “We received reports on the Manhattan Project from [J. Robert] Oppenheimer and his friends [Niels Bohr, Enrico Fermi, and Leo Szilard] in oral form, through comments and asides, and from documents transferred through clandestine methods with their full knowledge that the information they were sharing would be passed on.”


says all four wittingly passed knowledge to the Soviets


------


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=VAwAAAAAMBAJ&dq=We+received+reports+on+the+Manhattan+Project+from+Oppenheimer+and+his+friends+in+oral+form%2C+through+comments+and+asides%2C+and+from+documents+transferred+through+clandestine+methods+with+their+full+knowledge+that+the+information+they+were+sharing+would+be+passed+on&q=Flimsy+memoirs#v=onepage&q&f=false
	Flimsy Memories

	By Priscilla Johnson McMillan

	...His account of the inner workings of the secret police also rings true, as when he describes the confusion over the death of Trotsky's son, Leon Sedov. Sudoplatov believes that Sedov's death in paris in 1938 was the rsult of natural causes.


hmmm


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lev_Sedov
	After an acute attack of appendicitis in February 1938, Mark Zborowski, an NKVD agent who had posed as Sedov’s comrade and friend, arranged to take him to a private clinic instead of a Paris hospital. At the same time, Zborowski notified the NKVD that Sedov had been transported under an assumed name to the Clinique Mirabeau,[3][4] which was itself, operated by a White Russian with connections to Soviet intelligence,[5] who performed an appendectomy. Complications set in after the operation, but Sedov apparently received no further treatment. He was later taken to a Paris hospital, where he died.[6]

	Some historians who have analyzed the matter believe Sedov was murdered by agents of Stalin who were in Paris watching him, either while in hospital or by poisoning him, causing his condition. In 1994, Pavel Sudoplatov, a lieutenant general in the NKVD who at that time was in charge of planning assassinations abroad, including the one of Sedov's father, claimed in his memoirs, Special Tasks, that Soviet agents played no part in his death.[7] However, in 1956, Zborowski himself had testified before a United States Senate subcommittee that he had contacted the NKVD to report that Sedov had entered the clinic, and then to confirm his death.[8]


who knows


	...This example of the way successes were tallied in the higher reaches of the NKVD may provide a clue as to what went wrong with the chapter called "Atomic Spies": reports of exaggerated access to atomic scientists may have been inflated at each stage upward in the reporting process until they were presented to top officials as major intelligence coups.

	Whatever the explanation, Sudoplatov and his co-authors make the unsupported claim that Bohr, Fermi, Oppenheimer, and Leo Szilard knowingly allowed the transfer of secret Manhattan Project documents to Moscow during World War II. Sudoplatov says that his allegations are based on reports he saw as the intelligence director of the Special Committee on Atomic Problems for three years, from 1944 to 1946. But according to a statement by the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service on May 5, "Pavel Sudoplatov had access to atomic problems during a relatively brief period, a mere 12 months, from September 1945 to October 1946.... Department 'S' had no direct contact with the agents' network." (According to Sudoplatov, Department S was formed in February 1944 to supervice attomic intelligence activites of both the GRU [army intelligence] and the NKGB.)

	According to Sudoplatov, Oppenheimer, Fermi, Szilard, and Szilard's secretary "were often quoted in the NKVD files from 1942 to 1945 as sources for information on the development of the first American atomic bomb.... On several occasions, they agreed to share information with Soviet scientists. At first they were motivated by fear of Hitler.... Then... Neils Bohr helped strengthen their inclinations.... By sharing their knowledge with the Soviet Union, the chance of beating the Germans to the bomb would be increased."



this doesn't seem accurate for all of them

Bohr stirring shit and generally being a bad influence sounds right (he was the one who came over to U.S. with news from Meitner about fission)

Szilard was pulling trickery and doing active measures since before the Manhattan project (the Einstein letter) and was involved with socialist schemes in Hungary, pointing to a different motive.

Fermi's actions and statements point to him being evil, maybe messed up long before Manhattan project

This works for Oppenheimer, who at least stated he was motivated by fear of Hitler and thought bomb should be shared with Soviets and told that to investigators


	Sudoplatov also says the Soviet rezident (agent) in San Francisco, Grigory Kheifetz, twice met Oppenheimer and his wife Kitty at cocktail parties in Berkeley in December 1941, and had lunch with Oppenheimer alone later that month. During this lunch, Oppenheimer is alleged to have revealed the existence of a letter written by Albert Einstein to President Franklin Roosevelt during the summer of 1939 urging research into the feasibility of the atomic bomb.


for Oppenheimer, this sounds believable


	Early in 1943, Sudoplatov says, a high-ranking Soviet agent masquerading as a diplomat met with Bruno Pontecorvo (who worked with Fermi in the early 1930s and who defected to Moscow in 1950.) Potecorvo told the Soviet agent that "Fermi was prepared to provide information." The authors assert that, acting in concert, Fermi, Oppenheimer, and Szilard helped place moles as lab assistants in Chicago, Oak Ridge, and Los Alamos. On th eAPril 18 MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, co-author Leona Schecter claimed that Fermi and Oppenheimer intentionall left papers on their desks at night for the moles to copy. By July 1943, Sudoplatov adds, "our agents in the United States had already provided us with 286 classified publications."


Was this intentional for Oppenheimer? Fermi?

Oppenheimer doesn't come off as a witting agent

why did he fall for things like meeting tatlock, all those meetings that were used to frame him?

signs of this afterward too: after befriending George Kennan, went on interviews and said things that made him sound sympathetic to Russia on interviews, which would increase suspicion of him by cold warriors


	The authors further contend that Elizabeth Zarubina, wife of a high-ranking Soviet agent and herself an NKVD captain, was "essential in developing Oppenheimer as a source" and that she also recruited one of Szilard's secretaries, "who provided technical data." Sudoplatov alleges that under the influence of Zarubina and Kheifetz, Oppenheimer suggested in 1943 that Klaus Fuchs be included in the British team that came to Los Alamos and that he later gave Fuchs "access to material he had no right to look at."


this is believable, depending on how they are said to have influenced him

could have used Kitty, "friends" like Chevalier, probably Ruth


	Pointing out that "the line between valuable connections and acquaintances is very shaky" and that Oppenheimer was not a "controlled agent," Sudoplatov nevertheless says that "we received reports on the progress of the Manhattan Project from Oppenheimer and his friends in oral form, through comments and asides, and from documents transferred through clandestine methods with their full knowledge that the information ... would be passed on."


characterizes Oppenheimer as not a "controlled agent"--sounds right, and important that Sudoplatov says this since it looks like there was an active measures campaign to smear Oppenheimer as a soviet agent


	There is more, but this is the gist. Questions have been raised about the authenticity of the book as a whole, and especially of this chapter. Sudoplatov was 85 years old when interviewing began, and a partial oral transcript of the "Atomic Spies" chapter, released by the Schecters after the book was published, shows Anatoli Sudoplatov feeding his father leading questions and the old man taking his answers back--as when the father says of Oppenheimer's relationship to Fuchs: "We're not talking about his [Oppenheimer's] knowing there was a connection to Soviet espionage. Soviet espionage was never mentioned."


Sudoplatov suggest Oppenheimer didn't know Fuchs was a soviet espionage agent


	Contradictions such as this one have led some observers to wonder how much of the chapter is Sudoplatov speaking, and how much is attributed to his three co-authors, a confusion that can only be settled by a reading of the entire transcript.


well they did have Robert Conquest write the forward...

this says transcript shows difference in ideas of Sudoplatov in interviews and what ended up final in the book.

Should find that transcript


------


this the transcript?

https://fas.org/faspir/archive/1990-2000/May-June1994.pdf

pg 5

	...ATOMIC ESPIONAGE -10:30 (Starts 1 minute into vid- eo) The atomic problem began in 1944, in the second half of ’44 when I was ordered to be in charge of spying for the atomic problem.

	Beria was the orqanizer of this whole business. He called me and said to organize this division. He said: we’ll call it “S” for Sudoplatov, We had major specialists in physics and of course an enormous amount of translators working on making use of the espionage materials on the atomic problem from the US and England. We had concentrated together the material collected by the chekists, the agents of the secret police, and the material collected by military intelligence.


Sudoplatov says in 1944 Beria called him up to organize a department to make sense of all the materials they got from atomic espionage from US and England


	[As is evident in these documents from that time, there were five most serious reports which helped and led to the establishment of work hereon atomic weapons. ] The first reports were from Grigoriy Markovich Kheifetz. There were Oppenheimer’s plans for the atomic bomb, and the development of his work into industrial areas. [When was that? ] This was approximately 1942 and ’43. Again in’43, were the results of Fermi’s experiments received from Pontecorvo. Here I would like to underline to you all the time that we are talking not about these comrades; comrades that’s an old way of speaking. These scientists were not our agents, Lord save us. We’re not talking about that. An agent is someone under your command. They were not under our command. Not one of these people.


Sudoplatov says "these scientists" [including at least Fermi and Oppenheimer] were not under their command.


	[But they passed material to you?] We received material all the same. But is wasn’t from agents that we received materials. We received materials from people who were fearful of the spread of the atomic plague, people who were worried about the future of our world, They didn’t want the atomic problem to remain just in the hands of some, for it all to remain the monopoly of the US. They wanted others to have it too.


Sudoplatov says "these scientists" were ideologically motivated by not wanting U.S. nuclear monopoly, "fearful of the spread of the atomic plauge."


	In 1944, we received from Szilard material about his work at Los Alamos. This was very important, and received with great approval and interest by our scientists: Kurchatov, Alikhanov, Klkoin. In 1945 we received from Fuchs an unpublished chapter of the report of the US atomic commission. These materials were passed by Oppenheimer and Fermi to Fuchs and then to our courier Fielding. From there it came to us. These were not spies or agents. They were scientists saving the world from war.


Sudoplatov says chapter of atomic comission passed from Oppie and Ferm to Fuchs then soviet courier. Says none of them (!) were their spies or agents, but "scientists saving the world"


	Don’t forget one thing which I want to specify: not every scientist communicating with our workers overseas was one of our agents. We didn’t have to recruit anyone into a network of agents. We established kind, friendly relations with them, in the course of which we received a lot of interesting information, talking on all sorts of subjects. [But Oppenheimer and Fermi passed interesting documents. ] Absolutely. [Do you remember the pseudonyms used in the telegrams that we looked at yesterday?] Charles is Fuchs, Star is Szilard. [And Miad, another source, is Pontecorvo?] I think so. yes.


Sudoplatov wants interviewers to "not forget" that not every scientist source was an agent (which I guess implies that some of them were? what would he say if questioned specifically on Fuchs?). 

says "we didn't have to recruit anyone into a network of agents" (or they were recruited long before Sudoplatov got involved...)

Sudoplatov says Szilard had codename "Star" in Soviet telegrams


	These weren’t people who could be bought, [But they gave you information in written form. 1 Sometimes they gave us inforlnation in written form when wc asked for it. They gave it in written form. These were people who liked the Soviet Union very much. They didn’t want knowledge of the atomic bomb to be concentrated solely in certain hands. It was on these factors that the sympathies of Op- penheimer and many others were based.


I think I know what's going on

in studies of active measures have noticed a pattern that some who act in their interest don't quite "fit," don't show signs of faking their personalities or careful and large-scale deception, and who sometimes create problems for them. And these people usually surrounded by agentura, and show markedly less political competency than them.

Ludendorff is one

Oppenheimer another

Trump kindof like that, Mao too


I think having "real people" unwittingly involved in their operations solves an important problem for them

if they have some propaganda narrative they want people to believe, or a cover they want to use to mask their motives, how are they going to know it's going to be believable? Psycopaths tend to mimic the emotions of people around them to solve exactly that problem. Like I think if the world were populated entirely by psycopaths, ideas like love, grief, and loyalty wouldn't exist. They have to learn these and pick them up from others, then act them out. (see: https://pastebin.com/c935hrBR)

So if it were all witting agents leading the Manhattan project, they'd have trouble coming up with a cover story for their motives that they'd be sure would be believable. Having someone like Oppenheimer there helps keep it "grounded," if that makes sense. Using influence they have on these people, it gives them a chance to test different cover stories and see which ones stick. And having "real" (in the sense of not actors) people there helps cover for them too--if there's a mix of non-agents and agents giving the same story, (in this case, thinking the Soviets needed the bomb and keeping it secret was wrong), it's harder to guess who is an agent and who isn't.

If someone not in on it says it or does it, it would give them more confidence to do or say the same thing.

suspect it does something else for them too: make it easier to blame the things they do to a country on the people of that country

In the case of Oppenheimer, he pushed for going ahead with the bomb even when his colleagues had doubts. So they can correctly say that some Americans pushed for the development of the atomic bomb, and that might help them take the blame off themselves.

There's a pattern of them finding people like this, surrounding them with their agents, and brining them to power. Mao, Ludendorff and Trump fit this pattern, and maybe Oppenheimer, too.


it's kindof like this from the protocols:


http://xroads.virginia.edu/~ma01/Kidd/thesis/pdf/protocols.pdf

    ...2. The administrators, whom we shall choose from among the public, with strict regard to their capacities for servile obedience, will not be persons trained in the arts of government, and will therefore easily become pawns in our game in the hands of men of learning and genius who will betheir advisers, specialists bred and reared from early childhood to rule the affairs of the whole world.


https://fas.org/faspir/archive/1990-2000/May-June1994.pdf
	There was the fear that the US hadn’t developed the project far enough yet. The US didn’t have enough of it’s own physicists of international stature.

	[What is known about the relationship between Oppen- heimer and Fuchs?] Well, what is known is that they worked together first of all, and Oppenheimer valued Fuchs highly as a physicist, as a person who could play an essential positive role in solving the atomic problem. [Did Oppenheimer know about Fuchs’ sympathies to the Soviet Union?] Maybe Oppenheimer knew about his feelings, and this may have made them closer to some degree. But of course we’re not talking about his knowing there was a connection to Soviet espionage. Soviet espionage was nev- er mentioned. This was all in terms of friendship and re- spect for the Soviet Union. It was a sincere desire to help a friend to not be defenseless in the face of this threatening enemy and thrtiatening weaponry like the atomic bomb.


Sudoplatov sees Fuchs as a spy but Oppenheimer as more of a dupe


	[But nonetheless in 1945 after Germany had been defeat- ed, according to this telegram, there was still top secret material coming out of the US about atomic weaponry. So were these scientists doing this knowingly?] Without a doubt, yes. Without a doubt it was done knowingly.


but says Oppenheimer was passing material knowingly (sounds like he means to include Oppenheimer from context)


	[The FBI followed closely Communist party members who were close to Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer cut off these ties with communists. Was he advised to do this by Liza Zarubina and Kheifetz?] We told them and others necessary to us with whom we were working to sever their ties and distance themselves from the local Communist parties. [That was a directive of Beria and yours?] Yes, [That’s a professional intelligence operation.] Absolutely right, absolutely right.


didn't Kitty tell Oppenheimer to start severing ties with Communists at one point? at least, this was picked up by the Nelson bug iirc. In the Nelson bug, they said she was putting him in the "wrong direction"--maybe not, after all. (even if the Nelson bug was for misdirection, they'd know Kitty herself was being bugged, so you can say with fair confidence that Kitty actually did this)


	[Semyonov recruited the Rosenberg for espionage work, but what role did they play in obtaining information for tbe atomic problem?] Well 1’11 tell you, and I will underline once again that the Rosenberg were not our agents. They were the source of information for a whole line of other questions, and that’s where it all began. It all began with other questions, and then we established very close and trusting relations with them. [So they were never paid?] My God, there was ttcver any question of paying them. That would have been an insult. [So they voluntarily helped Soviet espionage?] Of course, of course, of course. They had the greatest respect for the Soviet Union


Sudoplatov wants to emphasize that Rosenbergs weren't their agents.

Says they were never paid and originally were sources for "a whole line of other questions." Says they voluntarily helped the Soviets. and had "greatest respect" for Soviet union.


	Niels Bohr helped us by the way. [How did that hap- pen?] Our people ran into a particular difficulty. Our spc- cPalists who were working in a certain direction ran into a dead end. What to do? Turn to Oppenheimer? We decided not to, but to turn to Bohr instead. [That was 1946?] Approximately, but it’s been awhile you know. Yes, and we dccidcd to turn to Bohr. We took SL young worker from my division “S”, which I told you about, a young theoretical physicist, and we sent him to Bohr. Denmark, at the time, had been recently liberated from the Germans by the Red Army, and attitudes in general to Soviet Russians were especially warm. Bohr received this young physicist, just starting out, and gave him all the information we wanted, but he didn’t know that the fellow had been sent by Sudoplatov. And as a result we received. the very imporant information necessary to find the exit from the dead end. [To launch the atomic reactor.] And Bohr told us how to do it.


Offers that "Neils Bohr helped us by the way" in 1946

they sent a scientist spy to him and Bohr passed him info

Sudoplatov chalks this up to attitudes toward the Soviets being 'especially warm' after Denmark "liberated" from Germans.

does Sudoplatov actually believe this? he keeps saying emphatically that his sources were motivated by warm feelings for the Soviets

from his perspective and the perpective of many Soviet people, *not* having warm feelings for the Soviets might be seen as the crazy attitude to take, as the Soviet people at that time were suffering greatly then defeating a great evil.

If Oppenheimer believed it was right and necessary to help Soviet agents (I guess under assumption this would help the Soviet people), it's plausible that some Soviet intelligence agents believed the same or similar things Oppenheimer believed.

On the other hand, it would be strange for a high-level KGB officer to be misinformed, well-meaning and honest, given what they knew and what they were used for.

Could be that even with knowing a lot, it's not always easy to figure out what they're up to. Bezmenov more or less did that, and apparently it took him some time and thinking.

Other things said by Sudoplatov in his book are generally considered accurate and credible.



	...FAS Interview with the Schecters -- Self-described "Grand Jury"

	“We think Sudoplatov may be wrong,” Jerry Schecter says firmly, “but we definitely think he be- lieves what he h= said.” (He and Leona nti enthusiasti- cally.) They think the b=ic charge that Oppenheimer, Fermi and Szilard “planted moles” and let them copy papers is “plausible. ‘‘ “1 don’t think he had any reason to make it up,” she says.



------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pavel_Sudoplatov
	Lieutenant General Pavel Anatolyevich Sudoplatov (Russian: Пáвел Aнатóльевич Cудоплáтов; July 7, 1907 – September 26, 1996) was a member of the intelligence services of the Soviet Union who rose to the rank of lieutenant general.[1] He was involved in several famous episodes, including the assassination of Leon Trotsky, the Soviet espionage program which obtained information about the atomic bomb from the Manhattan Project, and Operation Scherhorn, a Soviet deception operation against the Germans in 1944. His autobiography, Special Tasks, made him well-known outside the USSR, and provided a detailed look at Soviet intelligence and Soviet internal politics during his years at the top.[2][3][4]


famous inside and outside Soviet Union?


	...Sudoplatov was recruited into the Cheka in 1921, at the age of fourteen, and was promoted to the Secret Political Department of the Ukrainian State Political Directorate (OGPU) in 1927.[3]

	He transferred to the Soviet OGPU in 1933, moving to Moscow, and soon after became an "illegal", operating under cover in a number of European countries.


in Checka at 14, illegal agent in Europe

	
	...On May 23, 1938, he personally assassinated the Ukrainian nationalist leader Yevhen Konovalets in Rotterdam by giving him a box of chocolates containing a bomb.[5]

	According to Sudoplatov, the order to murder Konovalets came directly from Joseph Stalin, who had personally told him: "This is not just an act of revenge, although Konovalets is an "agent" of German fascism. Our goal is to behead the movement of Ukrainian "fascism" on the eve of the war and force these "gangsters" to annihilate each other in a struggle for power."

	After delivering the bomb to Konovalets, Pavel Sudoplatov calmly walked away and waited nearby to verify that it had successfully detonated.[3]


killin natsies?

or did it end up helping them...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yevhen_Konovalets
	Konovalets' activities raised fears in the Kremlin because of penetration of the OUN into the Soviet Union. On May 23, 1938, he was assassinated in Rotterdam by a bomb rigged to explode hidden inside a box of chocolates. This booby-trap was disguised as a present from a close friend. This friend, however, was in reality an NKVD agent who had infiltrated the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists, Pavel Sudoplatov, who on a recent visit to the Soviet Union had been personally ordered by Joseph Stalin to assassinate Konovalets in retaliation for the assassination of a Soviet diplomat at the consulate in Lwów in 1933. 


Wikipedia says Sudoplatov posed as Konovalets "close friend" before assassinating him

the articles in WaPo and NY Times tend to smear Sudoplatov for assassinating people.

Could what he did only have been carried about by a truly evil man? or was there more to it?


	Due to his sudden disappearance, the OUN immediately suspected Sudoplatov of Konovalets' murder. Therefore, a photograph of Sudoplatov and Konovalets together was distributed to every OUN unit. According to Sudoplatov,

	    In the 1940s, SMERSH... captured two guerilla fighters in Western Ukraine, one of whom had this photo of me on him. When asked why he was carrying it, he replied, "I have no idea why, but the order is if we find this man to liquidate him."[4]


either way, Sudoplatov saw fit to tell this story in his book


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pavel_Sudoplatov
	Near-purge

	In the fall of 1938, he was made acting director of the Foreign Department of the NKVD (as the OGPU had by then become) after the purging of the previous head, in a set of purges which later culminated in the fall of Nikolai Yezhov (who was eventually replaced by Lavrentiy Beria). Shortly afterward, Sudoplatov narrowly escaped being purged himself.[4]


almost got purged


	...Peace offer 1941

	In late July 1941, under the orders of Lavrentiy Beria, he met (in a Georgian restaurant in the centre of Moscow) with the Bulgarian ambassador, who was the representative of Germany in USSR, at the time. Sudoplatov asked the ambassador if Hitler would stop penetration of the USSR, in exchange for giving Germany, a large part of USSR.[3][6] No one knows if this proposition was true or if it was an attempt of USSR to gain time.[citation needed]


worth looking into?


	...MVD

	In the spring of 1953, around the time of Stalin's death, Sudoplatov was appointed to head the yet-again renamed MVD's Bureau of Special Tasks, which was responsible for sabotage operations abroad, and ran networks of "illegals" who were given the task of preparing attacks on military establishments in NATO countries, in the event that NATO attacked the Soviet Union.[3]


ran networks of illegals in NATO countries, in charge of sabotage operations (so this would include terrorist attacks)


	...After the fall of Lavrentiy Beria, Sudoplatov was arrested on August 21, 1953 as his alleged collaborator in crimes. He simulated madness to avoid being executed with Beria, and therefore he was tried only in 1958.[11] He was accused, among other things, of involvement with the Mairanovsky's laboratory of death:

	    "As established [during the court trial], Beria and his accomplices committed terrible crimes against humanity: they tested deadly poisons, which caused agonizing death, on live humans. A special laboratory, which was established for experiments on the action of poisons on living humans, worked under the supervision of Sudoplatov and his deputy Eitingon from 1942 to 1946. They demanded he provide them only with poisons that had been tested on humans...".[11]

	He was sentenced to 15 years in prison. After serving the full term (during which time he was housed with a number of Stalin's top assistants, also imprisoned), he was duly released in August, 1968.


got taken down with Beria and accused of human experimentation, reinstated 1992

after being released in 1968 wrote three books and a lot of letters during glasnot era before being reinstated


	...In his memoirs, he wrote with bitterness about his rehabilitation:

	    "The Soviet Union—to which I devoted every fiber of my being and for which I was willing to die; for which I averted my eyes from every brutality, finding justification in its transformation from a backward nation into a superpower; for which I spent long months on duty away from Emma and the children; whose mistakes cost me fifteen years of my life as a husband and father - was unwilling to admit its failure and take me back as a citizen. Only when there was no more Soviet Union, no more proud empire, was I reinstated and my name returned to its rightful place."


Sudoplatov says he was willing to do everything for the Soviet Union, "avert my eyes from very brutality" and find justification to transform into superpower

he says his improsonment was in injustice and is angry


	In 1994, his autobiography, Special Tasks,[3] based part on Sudoplatov's memory, part on some KGB documents and written with the help of his son Anatoliy and two American writers, was published; it caused a considerable uproar.[2] In addition to extensive details of many Soviet intelligence operations during Sudoplatov's career, and a similarly extensive discussion of the political machinations inside the intelligence services and the Soviet government, it claimed that a number of Western scientists who had worked on the atomic bomb project, such as Robert Oppenheimer, while not recruited agents for the Soviets, had provided important information.[3]:190–192 At first, this revelation was treated as a scoop by the American media,[12][13] but later it has been disputed by the Foreign Intelligence Service of Russia and the F.B.I., and dismissed by American and Russian scientists and historians.[7][14][15]


Wikipedia says Sudoplatov's info on Manhattan project scientists was originally treated as a "scoop," but became disputed when Russian intel leadership, including Freeh, came out against it


	Sudoplatov died on September 26, 1996, and was buried next to his wife at the New Donskoy Cemetery in Moscow.



------


https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB_djvu.txt
	Serebryansky’ s successor was Pavel Anatolyevich 
	Sudoplatov, who a few months earlier had assassinated 
	the emigre Ukrainian nationalist leader Yevkhen 
	Konovalets with an ingeniously booby-trapped box of 
	chocolates. In March 1939 Sudoplatov became deputy 
	head of foreign intelligence, thus bringing “special tasks” 
	and INO into closer association than ever before. He 
	was personally instructed by Stalin that his chief task was 
	to send a task force to Mexico to assassinate Leon 
	Trotsky. The killing of Trotsky, codenamed operation 
	UTKA (“Duck”), had become the chief objective of 
	Stalin’s foreign policy. Even after the outbreak of the 
	Second World War in September 1939, discovering the 
	intentions of Adolf Hitler remained a lower priority than 
	arranging the liquidation of the great heretic.

	Sudoplatov’s task force was composed of Spanish and 
	Mexican NKVD agents recruited during the Civil War, 
	supervised by his deputy, Leonid Eitingon, whose long 
	experience of “special actions” included the liquidation of 
	“enemies of the people” in Spain. 



I remember reading this, thought it was unusual how graphic Andrews went into detail on assassination of Trotsky

	...Mexican police later counted seventy-three bullet holes in 
	Trotsky’s bedroom wall. Remarkably, however, Trotsky 
	and his wife survived by throwing themselves beneath 
	their bed. Though an incendiary bomb was thrown into 
	the bedroom of their small grandson, he too escaped by 
	hiding under his bed.^^^ Harte was shocked by the attack 
	— ^particularly, perhaps, by the attempt to kill Trotsky’s 
	grandchild. He angrily told the assault group that, had he 
	known how they would behave, he would never have let 
	them in. 


this was written in 1999, after Sudoplatov's memiors


	...JUST AS THE KGB later sought to take refuge from the 
	horrors of its Stalinist past by constructing a Leninist 
	golden age of revolutionary purity, so it also sought to 
	reinvent its record during the Great Patriotic War of 1941- 
	5 as one of selfless heroism — ^best exemplified by its role 
	in special operations and partisan warfare behind enemy 
	lines. According to Pavel Anatoly evich Sudoplatov, head 
	of the wartime NKVD Directorate for Special Tasks and 
	Guerrilla Warfare, “This chapter in NKVD history is the 
	only one that was not officially rewritten, since its 
	accomplishments stood on their own merit and did not 
	contain Stalinist crimes that had to be covered up.”^^ In 
	reality, the NKVD’s wartime record, like the rest of its 
	history, was extensively doctored.



Andrews comes off negative on Sudoplatov, who wrote a "detailed" book on Soviet intelligence but only gets mentioned 4 times in book, 3 about the Trotsky assassination 


Sudoplatov cited around 20-30 times in book



but:


	...Mitrokhin’ s material identifies the approximate locations 
	of a number of the secret sites in the United States 
	selected for KGB arms and radio caches for use in 
	sabotage operations. On present evidence, it is impossible 
	to estimate the number of these caches which were put in 
	place. However, the former KGB general Oleg Kalugin, 
	who was stationed in New York and Washington during 
	the 1960s and early 1970s, has confirmed the existence of 
	some KGB arms caches in the United States.


	...The 
	sample batch of his material, which he brought with him 
	to the embassy, was examined with amazement by 
	Kalugin and the Washington resident, Boris 
	Aleksandrovich Solomatin. According to Kalugin, 
	Solomatin’s “eyes widened as he leafed through the 
	Walker papers. ‘I want this!’ he cried.” Walker, they later 
	agreed, was the kind of spy who turns up “once in a 
	lifetime.” Enabling Soviet codebreakers to crack US navy 
	codes, claims Kalugin, gave the Soviet Union “an 
	enormous intelligence advantage” by allowing it to 
	monitor American fleet movements. 


	...Throughout the Cold War the main weakness of the 
	Washington residency was its inability to recruit agents 
	able to provide high-level political intelligence from 
	within the federal government. At the end of the 1960s, 
	however, it had one non-agent source to which it attached 
	great importance. A line PR officer, Boris Sedov, 
	operating under cover as a Novosti journalist, had 
	succeeded in making contact with Henry Kissinger while 
	he was still a professor at Harvard University. According 
	to Kalugin, “We never had any illusions about trying to 
	recruit Kissinger: he was simply a source of political 
	intelligence.” 

	...As head of Line PR in 
	Washington from 1965 to 1970, Kalugin got to know the 
	columnists Walter Lippmann, Joseph Kraft and Drew 
	Pearson; Chalmers Roberts and Murray Marder of the 
	Washington Post; Joseph Harsch of the Christian Science 
	Monitor; Carl Rowan, former director of the US 
	Information Agency; and Henry Brandon of the London 
	Times. Kalugin’s role when he called at their offices or 
	lunched with them in Washington restaurants was not that 
	of agent controller or recruiter.

	...it is easy to see why Djilas’s devastating expose of the 
	Soviet system as a co-optive oligarchy run by a privileged 
	Party nomenklatura should have been seen as so 
	subversive. In 1963 the twenty-year-old Russian dissident 
	Vladimir Bukovsky was sent to psychiatric hospital for 
	possessing a copy of it. Even for KGB officers The New 
	Class was seen as a potentially dangerous text. When 
	General Oleg Kalugin finally read the book in the KGB 
	library in 1981, twenty- four years after its publication in 
	the West, he found himself secretly agreeing with it.^^ 
	Why Nietzsche should have been mentioned in the same 
	breath as Djilas is more puzzling. His call for a 
	“revaluation of all values” so that the life force of the 
	strongest should not be hampered by the weak, though 
	bearing some relation to the actual practice of Stalinism, 
	was ideological anathema. But the works of Nietzsche, 
	unlike those of Djilas, were scarcely likely to subvert the 
	youth of the Soviet Bloc. The author of the KGB report 
	probably knew no more about the great German 
	philosopher than that he was a well-known enemy of 
	Marxism. 


Andrew consistently quotes his contemporary Oleg "probably never more than 10 illegals at one time" Kalugin as a reliable source

what's up with that?



other mentions of sudoplatov in footnotes:


	...14. vol. 5, sec. 11. Sudoplatov wrongly claims that 
	Mironov was simply “hospitalized and discharged from 
	the service” on the grounds of schizophrenia; Special 
	Tasks, p. 197.


	...Levine, The Mind of an Assassin, p. 221. Though 

		acknowledging Eitingon’s “deserved reputation as a man 
	of many affairs with women,” Sudoplatov argues 
	unconvincingly that his “close” relationship with Caridad 
	Mercader did not involve sex, since this would have been 
	a breach of regulations; Special Tasks, p. 70, 2. 


	...107. Suggestions to the contrary derive chiefly from two 
	sources: a fabricated version of the career of PERS 
	(renamed PERSEUS), apparently devised by the SVR for 
	purposes of mystification, perhaps to protect Theodore 
	Hall (cf. Albright and Kunstel, Bombshell, p. 271; 
	Weinstein and Vassiliev, The Haunted Wood, pp. 190- 
	\n.)\ and the fallible memory of Pavel Sudoplatov, far 
	less reliable on atomic espionage than on the “special 
	actions” to which he devoted most of his career (cf 
	Holloway, “Sources for Stalin and the Bomb'').



------


seems clear sudoplatov said something they don't like


question remains: how much did he know, and how honest is he? what kind of man was he?


...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavrentiy_Beria

seems like they didn't like Beria, and he was also evil

how do Sudoplatov get roped up in that?



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavrentiy_Beria
	...It was alleged that he had maintained secret connections with foreign intelligence services. In particular, attempts to initiate peace talks with Hitler in 1941 through the ambassador of Bulgaria were classified as treason, though Beria had been acting on the orders of Stalin and Molotov. 

	...Beria's participation in the Purge of the Red Army in 1941 was classified as an act of terrorism.

	...Counter-revolutionary activity during the Russian Civil War. In 1919 Beria worked in the security service of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.


https://www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/lavrenti-beria-executed
	Lavrenti Pavlovich Beria was a Georgian, like Stalin, who called him ‘my Himmler’. Involved in revolutionary activities from his teens and head of the secret police in Georgia in his twenties, he supervised the ruthless 1930s purges in the region and arrived in Moscow in 1938 as deputy to Nikolai Yezhov, ‘the blood-thirsty dwarf’, head of the Soviet secret police. He soon succeeded Yezhov, who was shot on Stalin’s orders, apparently at Beria’s prompting. Beria, who went on to run the Soviet network of slave-labour camps, was notorious for his sadistic enjoyment of torture and his taste for beating and raping women and violating young girls. Bald and bespectacled, by the time of Stalin’s death in 1953 he was one of the most hated men in the country.


Beria the fall guy? a psycopath who didn't bother to hide it


I guess he took the fall for some of Stalin's crimes and helped Kruschev come to power? not really sure, apparently he is important. internal Soviet politics is opaque



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavrentiy_Beria
	During the coup d'état led by Nikita Khrushchev and assisted by the military forces of Marshal Georgy Zhukov, Beria was arrested on charges of treason.

	...Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that Beria had, immediately after Stalin's stroke, gone about "spewing hatred against [Stalin] and mocking him." When Stalin showed signs of consciousness, Beria dropped to his knees and kissed his hand. When Stalin fell unconscious again, Beria immediately stood and spat.

	...Accounts of Beria's fall vary considerably. By the most likely account, Khrushchev prepared an elaborate ambush, convening a meeting of the Presidium on 26 June, where he suddenly launched a scathing attack on Beria, accusing him of being a traitor and spy in the pay of British intelligence. Beria was taken completely by surprise. He asked, "What's going on, Nikita Sergeyevich? Why are you picking fleas in my trousers?" Molotov and others quickly spoke against Beria one after the other, followed by a motion by Khrushchev for his instant dismissal.


Beria took the fall in Khruschev's coup while Khruschev wrote of Beria as disrespecting Stalin

Sudoplatov says Beria didn't murder Stalin

Khruschev I guess put a friendly face (comparatively) on the Soviet union after Stalin, while at least at first respecting Stalin's legacy

Khruschev's speech denouncing Stalin was said to be a big deal--to take a guess, Stalin's personality cult was a big deal even after his death, something Khruschev might have wanted to handle with political deftness

Apperances can be deceiving, and perhaps Khruschev was not so friendly--the great Chinese famine happened under him, an act of mass murder upstaging the holocaust and comparable to the world wars.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikita_Khrushchev
	His lengthy memoirs were smuggled to the West and published in part in 1970. Khrushchev died in 1971 of heart disease.


wikipedia hints at there being more to Khruschev


	...Even before Stalin had been laid to rest, Beria launched a lengthy series of reforms which rivalled those of Khrushchev during his period of power and even those of Mikhail Gorbachev a third of a century later.[105] Beria's proposals were designed to denigrate Stalin and pass the blame for Beria's own crimes to the late leader.[105] 


what's going on with Beria blaming Stalin? both seem perfectly evil

says both Beria and Khruschev were planning on reforms, but Beria lost the "power struggle"


------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/1994/05/01/the-long-hand-of-the-kgb/94ff71f8-c66d-4a4e-a6fc-61d19a7fb028/?utm_term=.9c3dd6cff1b2
	After his mentor KGB Chief Lavrenti Beria was arrested, Sudoplatov, accused of directing and personally participating in the murders of more than 200 people in the post-World War II Stalin purges, remained unrepentant. "My assessment of people and their deeds is always in agreement with the party line," he dryly notes in his memoir.


Ronald Sagdeev on WaPo says Beria was Sudoplatov's "mentor," and Sudoplatov was unrepentant of his "crimes," whatever those were


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/local/1996/09/27/pavel-sudoplatov-89-dies/46d6e456-cf25-40e4-aeef-2b0e2f69b59b/?utm_term=.c313413dcd50
	After the death of Stalin, Mr. Sudoplatov and his immediate supervisor and mentor, secret police chief Lavrenti Beria, were arrested. Beria was executed, but Mr. Sudoplatov was freed from prison in 1969, after having served more than 15 years. 


Bart Barnes of WaPo says similar, Beria Sudoplatov's "mentor"


so far, Beria and Sudoplatov come off as very different people

in his writings, Sudoplatov comes off as honest, even honestly beleiving those scientists were motivated by nothing more than helping the Soviet union.

Beria is some kind of monster

how is it that Beria was Sudoplatov's mentor, and what did he teach?



http://mailstar.net/sudoplat.html
	Sudoplatov had a Jewish wife and was loyal to Beria, and was arrested when Beria was arrested, accused of Zionist sympathies, in connection with the Doctors Plot. Although Sudoplatov dismisses that plot as false, other authors present new evidence that Stalin was murdered. 


jewish plot conspiracy theorist says Sudoplatov loyal to Beria and involved in some plot


https://books.google.com/books?id=z0yUNPuHS08C&pg=PP22&lpg=PP22&dq=Sudoplatov+Beria&source=bl&ots=9A5R0Mli1M&sig=-Rpp0jsox-nQzqivg3jPp5uvRxI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjIhO_o1_fZAhVH7IMKHT-WD2w4ChDoAQgvMAI#v=onepage&q=Sudoplatov%20Beria&f=false


this claims Beria berated Sudoplatov who at one point was worried Beria would kill him


http://blog.nuclearsecrecy.com/2012/02/27/putin-and-the-spies/
	This is a rather well-known event — Bohr met with Yakov Terletsky in Copenhagen in November 1945. It was sexed-up by the Pavel Sudoplatov in his infamous 1994 KGB memoir Special Tasks, where he claimed that Bohr was “essential to starting the Soviet reactor.” Since then historians have not tired of pointing out the flaws in Sudoplatov’s account, using Beria’s files to show that Bohr gave the USSR no more information than was already published in the Smyth Report (which the Soviets had already pored over in some detail).


Sudoplatov and Beria's accounts differed on how much Bohr helped the Soviets nuclear program



------


http://www.oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt958036zn/

Sudoplatov interviews locked up somehwere


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/1994/05/02/in-defense-of-gen-sudoplatovs-story/d059d702-c7bc-4292-84ac-e82fe92a5f90/?utm_term=.a5c356c31800

Schecter defends Sudoplatov's story


https://www.nytimes.com/1994/05/16/opinion/l-spy-memoir-lacks-any-real-evidence-097438.html

https://fas.org/faspir/pir0694.html

other "historians" upset about it


------

Sudoplatov's memo came out in 94, then venona declassified in 95, then Mitrokhin archives released after that

did these tend to corraborate Sudoplatov's account?


...


https://charlierose.com/videos/19411

5:24

"historian" Richard Rhodes: I cannot speak of authority to the rest of the book, but I woudl say cetagorically that these allegations against Neils Bohr [etc] ... are fiction, are a hoax, and I can demonstrate today what I mean and why I say that.

mostly puts words in his mouth on allegations against Oppenheimer--could you believe that Oppenheimer was a spy when he told security about Soviet approaches? Except Sudoplatov didn't accuse Oppenheimer of being a spy...