

if I remember right:


original petition jan 28 says Aziz bros LPRs who were deported due to EO

ammended petition jan 30 says they signed away LPR status and were entering LPRs, not returning residents


was ammended petition filed before or after Yate's memo?


------


I think original petition didn't claim they were residents

case was I guess that they were detained without access to lawyers


this is petition for habeas corups:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0003.pdf
pg 3

	Petitioners JOHN DOES 1-60 are approximately 50-60lawful permanent residents of the United States, most of whom are returning from trips abroad, all of whom are nationals of one of the following seven countries: Lybia, Iraq, Iran, Yemen, Syria, Sudan, Somalia. All are presently being held against their will by CBP officers in the international arrivals area of Dulles Airport. All are being held in an area where other passengers disembarking from international flights can see and hear them; accordingly, there is no reason that their attorneys could not be permitted to meet with them.


pg 7

	...Petitioners are not being permitted to meet with their attorneys who are present at IAD and have made multiple attempts to meet with them.


weird

doesn't claim they are residents anywhere, then around page 8 says they are being detained in violation of Rosenberg . Flueti and statues for returning LPRs

I guess does say "most" of the LPRs being detained at dulles are returning residents and are petitioners, so applies to them.


	...Respondents are also detaining Petitioners in violation of the Due Process Clause. In Rosenberg v. Fleuti , 374 U.S. 449, 462 (1963), the Supreme Court held that “an innocent, casual, and brief excursion by a residen t alien outside this country's borders may not have been intended as a departure disruptive of his resident alien status and therefore may not subject him to the consequences of an entry into the country on his return.” (internal quotation marks and citati ons omitted); see also Kwong Hai Chew v. Colding , 344 U.S. 590, 601 - 02 (1953) (assimilating status, for constitutional purposes, of lawful permanent resident who had been abroad for five months to that of one continuously present). The Supreme Court reaffi rmed this constitutional principle in Landon v. Plasencia , 459 U.S. 21, 31 (1982) (describing Chew as standing for the proposition that “a resident alien returning from a brief trip has a right to due process just as would a continuously present resident a lien”). 

	34. As  lawful  permanent  residents  of  the  United  States,  Petitioners  are  attempting  to  return home.  

	35. John Does 1 - 60 are, on information and belief, approximately 50 - 60 lawful permanent residents of the United States situated similarly to the Aziz brot hers. None is being allowed access to counsel, notwithstanding the fact that there are over a dozen barred attorneys on the scene and willing to represent them pro bono . All are being denied entry into the United States and all are being told that they w ill be put on an airplane imminently.



Is this true?

saying they were being detained without due process

CBP policy was to grant LPRs waivers while detainig them to find "significant derogatory information."

This guidance given some time jan 28

DHS OIG report says they were given access to attorneys (another report, media maybe? says they were given numbers for attorneys to call). DHS OIG summary:

	We found that the lack of a public or congressional relations strategy significantly hampered CBP. For example, in Aziz v. Trump, a federal court had temporarily enjoined CBP at Dulles airport in Virginia from r et urning LPRs. The court had also ordered CBP to "permit lawyers access to all [LPRs] being detained at Dulles ... . " CBP complied with the order not to remove LPRs and soon after the TRO issued, processed for entry the remaining five LPRs held in secondary inspection. However, CBP did not communicate that LPRs were not being denied access to lawyers either to the public or in response to Congressional inquiries, resulting in significant public protests and suspicion that CBP was not complying with a court order.


petition says they are being detained pending being deported without access to lawyers

CBP policy says detained to do some bullshit before letting them in and they were given access to lawyers

DHS OIG summary:

	The bulk of the travelers affected by the EO who arrived in the United States, particularly LPRs, received national interest waivers. We found that the waiver process was largely pro-forma, and that none of the travelers received scrutiny greater upon referral to secondary inspection than they would have received in the absence of the EO.

maybe still a due process violation? but not so much a slam dunk

real question is: why didn't the administration say this?


if they are not going to be deported by CBP policy, hard to argue you need an emergency injunction or TRO.

If they are allowed to access lawyers, harder to argue the admin is going to screw them over against 5th ammendemtn while they are in detention

so they would have had a shot at stopping this TRO, but didn't. Why?



------


ammended petition Jan 30


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0016.pdf
	8.During the brief time Tareq and Ammar were in the United States, employees or agents of respondents coerced Tareq and Ammar to sign U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Form I-407, which is entitled “Record of Abandonment of Lawful Permanent Resident Status.” The immigrant visas that they had fought so long and hard to obtain were thereupon cancelled –and, to add insult to injury, this was falsely claimed to bea result of theirvoluntary request. Seehttps://www.uscis.gov/i-407(“Use Form I-407 to let us know that you have decided voluntarily to abandon your status as a lawful permanent resident of the United States. We will then update your records to show that you are no longer an LPR.”).


something new not in first petition


due process claims:


	76. One of the procedur al due process rights denied petitioners was access to legal counsel, to their specific and material injury. Respondents prohibited petitioners from conferring with attorneys who were present on the scene and willing to advise and represent them on a pro b ono basis.

	77. Further, the grant of the immigrant visas to petitioners, such as the IR2 visas to Tareq and Ammar, created an entitlement to the lawful permanent resident status and subsequent provision of a “green card.” These entitlements were revoked withou t due process of law.

	...79.The actions of respondents—as well as respondents’ employees and agents—coerced or compelled Tareq and Ammar to withdraw their applications for admission against their will. These were neither freely made norknowing and informed decisions. The conduct of respondents, and their employees and agents, thus violated petitioners’ procedural and substantive due process rights.


when was this filed?

kindof suspicious, like have a stronger case first then show its watered down maybe by the time its too late

if the John Doe petitioners were returning residents, dunno why they couldn't argue the same rights of returning aliens thing for them


------


this is petition for emergency TRO:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf
	Upon information and belief, respondents intend to imminently remove Tareq Aziz and Ammar Aziz from the United States absent injunctive relief from this Court.


this was true, except they siged away LPR status

once this was filed, or before then, why not just show evidence of the CBPs policy for LPRs?

what ended up happening is they signed away LPR status and were deported before TRO could be issued

doesn't make them look very good legally


------


what bearing did aziz v. Trump have on other cases, final decision not to grant gov stay to wash case, national security according to Trump?


some of the weirdest stuff going on here:

detained being allowed to contact lawyers, but CBP not communicating this

detained according to policy of CBP to let in LPRs, with whole case able to have been avoided if admin had made this clear

ammended complaint with Aziz turning out to have signed away LPR status, changing whole thing, class, claims


gov handling ends up letting people believe gov will remove LPRs absent court orders

bears on Louhghalam hearing I think? saying worried people could be removed without court order, judge says "familiar" with what happened in virginia

not mentioned explicitly in hearing otherwise I think


lawyers would just argue gov changed their policy without citing aziz


another thing with aziz was that for removal protection, darweesh already covered that and courts seemed to agree it was a national order

so ends up all that aziz did was order them to let them see lawyers

maybe it was mostly for public opinion? 