

a lot of cases were initial LPR or LPR deported, sometimes right before court order


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15593

Vayeghan v. Kelly, would have got green card in mail after landing, signed away green card (or admission?) and deported before order staying removal


Aziz v. Trump same thing: initial LPRs, deported before stay after signing away

in that case original petition didn't mention initial LPRs or signed away status

some in media reported that way too:

http://www.slate.com/news-and-politics/2018/01/people-are-completely-missing-the-point-of-oprahs-amazing-golden-globes-speech.html
	But that isn’t the case for Tareq Aqel Mohammed Aziz and Ammar Aqel Mohammed Aziz. The two young men, citizens of Yemen and lawful holders of U.S. green cards, were refused entry to the United States at Dulles Airport on Saturday, and are now trapped in what their lawyer described as “Tom Hanks limbo” at the Addis Ababa airport in Ethiopia.


Asali v. Trump signed away initial LPR status or admission and deported

	https://www.upi.com/In-Lebanon-Syrian-lives-on-hold-after-US-refugee-ban/1311486474988/
	"They took them in a room, where they were not allowed to give us a phone call," Sarmad Assali, the deported brothers' sister-in-law, said in a phone interview. "They were denied an interpreter and an attorney and forced to sign papers they didn't understand, under the threat of being handcuffed, detained and not being allowed back in the U.S. for five years. They have dignity, so they signed and were sent back on a plane without even being allowed to touch their passports and documentation."

	...At the airport, the Assalis had been forced to sign the I-407 form, a record of abandonment of any legal residency status, but the family's attorney, Jonathan Grode, said the fact that they had been previously security cleared in the U.S. Embassy in Amman, Jordan, helped them to reinstate their visas.


same for Almursis



------

http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-deported-iranian-student-02012017-story.html

Sara Yarjani resident with student visa, signed away admission


------

https://www.wcpo.com/news/national/suha-abushamma-cleveland-clinic-doctor-sues-donald-trump-after-being-forced-to-leave-us

resident on J-1 visa I think, Suha Abushamma, claimed in petition was forced to sign away admission


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0084-0001.pdf


Azad specifically about those coerced, or accusing of being coerced, into signing away admission


but this doesn't cover LPRs signing away status, just this practice in general

doesn't look like any named plaintiffs were residents on another visa either


------


so all of these could find were either initial LPRs or non-LPR residents, or non-residents

no LPR signed away status?


is this really going to fool courts?

Aziz and Vayeghan were reported in the media as if they were green card holders deported, signing away admission a footnote maybe


according to ACLU, the gov did at least try to get LPRs to sign away their status:


https://www.scpr.org/news/2017/01/30/68577/lax-immigration-agents-asked-detainees-to-sign-awa/
	January 30, 2017
	
	Several people with green cards traveling from countries targeted under President Donald Trump's immigration executive order were held for hours and questioned by Customs and Border Protection officers.

	During those interviews, the agents put forms in front of some detainees and tried to persuade them to sign away their residency status, said Stacy Tolchin, a private attorney working with the ACLU in representing detainees.

	"We believe immigration was trying to coerce them into abandoning their permanent residency status," Tolchin said.

	In another development, the Associated Press reported on Monday that acting Attorney General Sally Yates, a Democratic appointee, said she's directed Department of Justice attorneys not to defend Trump's executive order...


	...In an L.A. federal court filing Saturday on behalf of Fatema Farmad and Marzieh Moosavizadeh Yazdi, the detainees' attorneys said the immigration agents' actions amounted to an attempt to "coerce individuals to sign a form to relinquish their lawful permanent resident status or otherwise withdraw their applications for admission."

	Tolchin said attorneys concluded this after speaking to the detainees and their families about the documents they were asked to sign.

	One form, I-407, allows those with green cards to voluntarily abandon their status as a lawful permanent resident of the United States. Tolchin said the form is used when a green card holder decides to return to their homeland and give up their U.S. residency. Federal immigration law states that when a returning permanent resident is seeking admission, the government cannot bar them, she said.

	...Tolchin said attorneys also believe, based on information from detainees, relatives and other attorneys, that along with these other visa holders, some legal permanent residents were asked to sign forms abandoning their legal residency. 

	This may not have been the case throughout the weekend. Helen Attai, a volunteer interpreter in Farsi from Granada Hills, said she interviewed travelers from Iran coming through arrivals Sunday afternoon. She said while people were held several hours, none reported being asked to sign forms. 


kindof weird article


but it would be interesting if a lawful resident got deported over the weekend, then it turned out that resident signed away his or her status, and Yates knew this person was deported but didn't know they signed away their status...



here's Natasha Bertrand reporting on the same:

http://www.businessinsider.com/trump-immigration-ban-travel-ban-2017-1
	Lawsuit: Dozens of immigrants trying to enter the US coerced into giving up visas and green cards after Trump travel ban


talking about Aziz lawsuit, which got modified into being about I-407 forms


right, remember this

ammended complaint says this:

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3438631/EDVA-Amended-Complaint.pdf
	Petitioners JOHN DOES 1-60 are approximately 60 lawful permanent residents of the  United  States,  or  immigrant  visa  holders,  all  nationals  of  Syria,  Libya,  Iran,  Iraq,  Somalia, Yemen or Sudan, who landed at Dulles Airport on January 27 and/or 28, 2017. Upon information and belief, some of theseJohn Does were, like Tareq and Ammar, unlawfully forced to withdraw their  applications  for  admission  by  means  of  being  compelled  into  signing  I-407  forms  against their  will  and  without  their  knowledge  or  consent,  and  placed  on  planes  headed  to  foreign countries.1

	... 1 Petitioners anticipate seeking leave to file ammended pleadings as further John Does are identified


and, upon knowledge and belief, no John Does ever were...



------


https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-30/airlines-scramble-to-adjust-to-trump-s-new-world
	January 30, 2017, 3:11 PM EST

	As new U.S. travel rules plunged several large American airports into chaos, lawyers for some travelers who are long-term legal residents said the government had urged them to relinquish their status as a requirement for reentering the country.

	This was among the more curious developments over a weekend in which a Trump administration order restricting entry into America was met with condemnation abroad and furious protests at home. The official U.S. document, Form I-407, “record of abandonment of lawful permanent resident status,” was distributed on several aircraft that landed this weekend at Los Angeles International Airport, said Rachel Odio, an immigration lawyer with pro-bono law firm Public Counsel. Other travelers saw the forms after they had been detained by U.S. Customs and Border Protection employees in the airport, she said.

	...“When you’re an LTR (long-term resident) you present your passport, you present your green card and they say ‘Welcome home,’” Bolour said. “That’s what’s supposed to happen.”

	It was unclear exactly why the U.S. would seek to reduce the number of long-term residents, many of whom obtained green cards through marriage. “I have no idea why the government would be trying to have these people sign these forms except maybe to reduce the number of those people from these countries who reside in the U.S.,” Odio said. “It’s really terrifying.”