http://dailycaller.com/2017/02/09/doj-ignored-evidence-of-terrorism-leading-to-travel-ban-being-struck-down/
	In an email provided to TheDC, conservative attorney Hans Bader informed DOJ assistant director Sharon Swingle on Monday, a day before the appeals court hearing, that Judge Robart was wrong that no terrorists have come from these nations. Swingle is working on the case for the Trump administration. The DOJ has not responded to a press inquiry about why their attorneys were unprepared.


DOJ throwing case on purpose?


to guess, maybe a cover for why the admin failed so badly to defend ban

Trump would argue his DOJ undermining him, could cite as reasons to fire Yates

doesn't strictly work for all cases, though--TRO can be granted without hearing, lazy "discovery" (dunno what to call it), like basically instead of doing investigation they just point to things to say "see it looks like this is true." So public statements, media reports matter a lot, have bearing on judge decision to grant TRO


------


http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/byron-york-justice-department-demolishes-case-against-trump-order/article/2613988
	Now the government has answered Robart, and unlike the judge, Justice Department lawyers have produced a point-by-point demolition of Washington State's claims. Indeed, for all except the most partisan, it is likely impossible to read the Washington State lawsuit, plus Robart's brief comments and writing on the matter, plus the Justice Department's response, and not come away with the conclusion that the Trump order is on sound legal and constitutional ground.


WHy is Byron York writing this? written Feb 5


I guess saying courts making national security determinations, ostensibly not as equipped to do that as President? like he could have done EO based on classified information of imminent terrorist threats.


------

https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/codification/executive-order/11030.html
	(b) If the Director of the Office of Management and Budget approves the proposed Executive order or proclamation, he shall transmit it to the Attorney General for his consideration as to both form and legality.

	(c) If the Attorney General approves the proposed Executive order or proclamation, he shall transmit it to the Director of the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration: Provided, that in cases involving sufficient urgency the Attorney General may transmit it directly to the President; and provided further, that the authority vested in the Attorney General by this section may be delegated by him, in whole or in part, to the Deputy Attorney General, Solicitor General, or to such Assistant Attorney General as he may designate.
	
	(d) After determining that the proposed Executive order or proclamation conforms to the requirements of Section 1 of this order and is free from typographical or clerical error, the Director of the Office of the Federal Register shall transmit it and three copies thereof to the President.

	(e) If the proposed Executive order or proclamation is disapproved by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget or by the Attorney General, it shall not thereafter be presented to the President unless it is accompanied by a statement of the reasons for such disapproval.


went to OLC instead of AG -- not by the book

------


what guidance, if any, did the admin give fed lawyers over the weekend?


https://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/justice-department-trump-travel-ban-234561
	OLC did not also produce a formal written opinion or other final legal advice on the executive order because the Justice Department said this document was the only responsive record to POLITICO's request.


what did they request?