

looks like a tit-for-tat going on over travel ban?


to fire yates, bad guys would not want Yates to be right, that the ban is undefendable.

Specifically, they would not want it to be clear cut that it blocks travel for returning LPRs--a clear, explicit legal history saying you can't bar them on return without due process. Not even Republians in Congress could argue against that.

But the admin did things (or didn't do things) that made it, at least at first, look like the ban was being applied to LPRs when they had a policy, a workaround with the waiver so that they could argue it didn't.



This showed up the most in Aziz v. Trump.

LRPs were stranded at dulles airport, and the case was brought out of fear they would be sent back, something lawyers argued and apparently the courts found credible.


the petition for habeas corpus also assumed they were being treated as if seeking admission, citied Rosenberg v. Fleuti and having due process counts:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0003.pdf

pg 8


petition for stay of removal had the same assumption they were being treated as seeking admission and were about to be removed (pg 2 "Upon information and belief, respondents imminently intend to remove these individuals from the United States.")

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf


but the administration would be able to argue they were not being treated as if seeking admission. They had a policy of letting in LPRs after a secondary inspection, sent in an email to directors at 1:00 AM on Jan 28:


https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3914492-EO-FOIA-CBP-Set-1.html#document/p14

says "first time arriving immigrants" should be allowed to sign away admission or put in expedited removal. Says Lawful Permanent Residents should be referred for [REDACTED] and held at the port of entry until an exemption to the Executive Order is granted."

Maybe not quite a policy of letting them in--looks like they never say explicitly in this early "guidance" that all LPRs should be granted exemptions.


https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3920699-DHS-1st-Release-Redacted.html#document/p238/

pg 237

from senior DHS people jan 28 12:30 AM

"We may want to host another call at some point tomorrow morning to understand the impact, and to explain how we've addressed certain scenarios such as LPRs and TSDBs, among others."


Although aparently had no guidance or system for this from 6:40 PM 27 until around midnight (https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3914494-EO-FOIA-CBP-Set-2.html
 pg 70)


Then on 29th, Kelly makes statement and a memo saying out saying "we expect swift entry" for LPRs.

But besides initial period after EO signing pending "guidance," looks like that one senior official was right: nothing had changed.



...


So this is what they did:


the text of the EO barred returning LPRs, and DHS right off the bat knew this is illegal.

Instead of changing the EO or making some kind of declaration, DHS and CBP decided to use the waiver exemption to let in LPRs.

But, for some reason, the admin did more inexplicable things:

they required a long secondary screening for returning LPRs

they made it so they would be held until granted an exemption

they did not communicate their policy of allowing LPRs to the public, or even that well to CBP staff

They had a policy of asking any first time immigrant to sign away admission or go to expediated removal proceedings, even initial LPRs


so when the LPRs got detained at Dulles, and some (initial) LPRs got sent back, lawyers, going by the text of the EO, the only authoratitive explanation they really had, could argue that the order was being applied as the text said and LPRs were being barred from admission.


Yates would not be able to defend this as it appeared. Possibly, they hoped Yates would refuse to defend the ban on these grounds on her own. Alternativiely, they could have her position ghostwritten saying as much depending on what she knew.

Then, the admin could reveal what was really going on and win, or at least have an argument, making Yates look foolish and wrong, justifying her firing.


...


But this didn't work out. As it turned out, LPRs were stranded overseas due to the EO anyway. And any of these would have a strong case, such that if Yates cited them in her reasons not the defend the ban, Trump would not be able to justify firing her.


The possibility of LPRs stranded overseas was first brought up in courts in the wee hours of the morning on Jan 29, 2017, by Susan Church, in the Louhghgalam hearing:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0004.pdf

Church also said a rep from the AG's office told her of this.

The lawyers said they planned on ammending the case with stranded LPRs and the TRO was filed with this in mind.

It was after this, at 6:30 on the 29th, the delta started getting computer outages

this was fortuitous for the bad guys: now they could argue that anyone stranded was the result of computer problems, and not the EO



...


so what was going on with CBP's "guidance" to airlines?

it is not strictly that the don't want anyone stranded--rather, they don't want anyone stranded in a way that they could bring a strong argument to court.

If they could claim any LPR stranded was done so in error, that LRP would have a weaker argument. So, the confusing "guidance" to airlines helped them out in that sense.

probably, reports are credible that CBP told airlines to let through LPRs on friday night--they had every reason to do this. But the important thing is did they communicate this well? to everyone? and if not, why?





------


wash v. trump TRO weird -- seems like shouldn't be necessary after Mohommad v. United States


Mohommad and a bunch of other cases sort of got absored into it


if those earlier TROs had never happened, would they have gone ahead with Wash v. Trump?

case suspicious--Washington's lawyer (Purcell) sucks, for example


also suspicous court decided to not bother making a decision on likliness to win on grounds of being a Muslim ban