
from wash v. trump decision against gov stay

"Likelihood of Success--Due Process"


	...First, section 3(c) denies re-entry to certain lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant visaholders without consitutionally sufficient notice and opportunity to respond.


Is this true for Doe v. Trump? The airline denied him a ticket "due to the EO," but CBP apparently by then had already told airlines to let LPRs through.

Is it true for the families detained in Aziz? Louhghalam? They were detained, but eventually released.


	...Second, section 3(c) prohibits certain lawful permanent residents and non-immigrant visaholders from exercising their separate and independent constitutionally protected liberty interests in travelling abroad and thereafter re-entering the United States.


Covered in Sorsaor (sp) v. Trump. Basically cases are people saying they are afraid to leave country due to the E.O.


	...Third, section 5 contravenes the procedures provided by federal statute for refugees seeking asylum and related relief in the United States.


Covered in Darweesh v. Trump and Asali v. Trump.


	...Nor has the Government established that the Executive Order provides lawful permanent residents with constitutionally sufficient process to challenge their denial of re-entry.


This is clear on the face of the EO: an LPR can get a waiver, but the EO does not specify any way they can challenge the decision if denied. It doesn't say LPRs can apply for a waiver either. It says it's up to the discretion of SoS or DHS senior official or something.

I don't think any petition talks about waivers though. Like Louhghalam v. Trump just said they were detained unlawfully.

I don't think they ever argued on anyone's particular case. [not true, they argued on Aziz, saying he was seeking admission]


	...The Government has argued that, even if lawful permanent residents have due process rights, the States' challenge to section 3(c) based on its application to lawful permanent residents is moot because several days after the Executive Order was issued, White House counsel Donald F. McGahn II issued "[a]uthoritative [g]uidance" stating that sections 3(c) and 3(e) of the Executive Order do not apply to lawful permanent residents. At this point, however, we cannot rely upon the Government's contention that the Executive Order no longer applies to lawful permanent residents. The Government has offered no authority establishing that the White House counsel is empowered to issue and amended order superseding the Executive Order signed by the President and now challenged by the States, and that proposition seems unlikely.

	Nor has the Government established that the White House counsel's interpretation of the Executive Order is binding on all executive branch officials responsible for enforcing the Executive Order. The White House counsel is not the President, and he is not known to be in the chain of command for any of the Executive Departments.


Why weren't they able to show this at this point? Shouldn't this be easy to fix? but this was a key point in the decision not to lift TRO.


	Moreover, in light of the Government's shifting interpretations of the Executive Order, we cannot say that the current interpretation by White House counsel, even if authoritative and binding, will persist past the immediate stage of these proceedings. On this record, therefore, we cannot conclude that the Government has shown that it is "*absolutely clear* that the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur."


Trump admin shot itself in foot (ostensibly) with "shifting interpretations" of the EO. Court says: if it changed before, why couldn't it change again? Even after McGahn memo, court is saying they left it too vague and up-in-the-air that restricting travel of LPR could happen again.

I think this is similar to Doe v. Trump, which cited the shifting statements on EO application to LPRs to argue it was "unconstitutionally vague."


	...Even if the claims based on the due process rights of lawful permanent residents were no longer part of this case, the States would continue to have potential claims regarding possible due process rights of other persons who are in the United States, even if

	...unlawfully

	...non-immigrant visaholders who have been in the United States but temporarily departed or wish to temporarily depart

	...applications who have a relationship with a U.S. resident or an institution that might have rights of its own to assert

	...Accordingly, the Government has not demonstrated that the States lack viable claims based on the due process rights of persons who will suffer injurities to protected interests due to the Executive Order.


9th circuit says these are "viable claims," and that gov has not shown otherwise. Why not? How much if this is just gov lawyers doing a bad job? How far could Trump argue the courts are just being "political?"

DHS was explicit that F1/J1/M1 visaholders outside U.S. are out of luck. Cases of this at least in media.

How does this factor into "likely to win?" That the 9th circuit will rule that these visa-holders have same rights as returning LPRs? That supreme court will? That gov will continue to do a bad job arguing against this?


	...First, we decline to limit the scope of the TRO to lawful permanent residents and the additional category more recently suggested by the Government, in its reply memorandum, “previously admitted aliens who are temporarily abroad now or who wish to travel and return to the United States in the future.”


anticipating problems with certain visa holders


	That limitation on its face omits aliens who are in the United States unlawfully, and those individuals have due process rights as well. Zadvydas, 533 U.S. at 693. That would also omit claims by citizens who have an interest in specific non-citizens’ ability to travel to the United States. See Din, 135 S. Ct. at 2139 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment); id. at 2142 (Breyer, J., dissenting) (six Justices declining to adopt a rule that would categorically bar U.S. citizens from asserting cognizable liberty interests in the receipt of visas by alien spouses). There might be persons covered by the TRO who do not have viable due process claims, but the Government’s proposed revision leaves out at least some who do.


I think this is saying that even if the TRO was limited to admitted trying to return, there would still be viable due process claims.

Particularly citizens trying to bring over family, like Ali case. So Ali case helped screw over the ban in court.

Don't understand why that is a "viable due process claim." Is the 9th circuit saying plaintiffs would be "likely to win" on that? I guess it adds to their likeliness to win?

Not sure if this is something that would meaningfully contribute to people's likeliness to win (supreme court seemed pretty clear) or the 9th circuit being political. Would they rule too harshly against the ban on purpose, just to give Trump ammo that he lost because courts are "political" and not because he sabotaged his ban? Any of these could be landmines.

Here's one test: Ali v. Trump included Trump's statements on intent of ban, but they didn't get a TRO or anything like that in district courts.

nope actually petition for TRO just got stayed and merged with other cases (Hawaii v. Trump for EO2)

and ali v trump says din provides for review of due process for denying entry to family members, something gov lawyers try to argue around



------


https://www.nilc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Darweesh-v-Trump-hearing-transcript-2017-02-02.pdf


By Feb 2, everyone detained by Darweesh case was released and gov tried to argue it was moot

Why not do that earlier? Did they?


pg 15

court says 

	And I mean in terms of the TRO now, I don't see thatthere's some concern that the government has for immediatelyremoving individuals from the country because there's no oneheld at the airports, as far as you know.


nobody detained in country due to EO by then?


pg 17

Donelly mix up preliminary injunciton in TRO? not like I would know...


pg 18

	...MR. GELERNT:  The only other thing, Your Honor, is whether there is an additional matter, is your Hono r brought up to the government is anybody being detained now.   And so that goes to the list that Judge Donnelly ordered o n Saturday night telling the government to provide us with a l ist of everyone that is being subjected to the order and d etained. We did not receive -- we still have actually not received complete confirmation that no one's being  detained, and so we're still waiting for that.  But I think i t brings up a question, and my colleague will address it in mor e detail, if you'd like, about what happened to the people be tween Saturday night and now.  We're very concerned and h ave evidence that people were removed, and so what we'r e going to --


plaintiff attorney says didn't get confirmation everyone was released from detention (but they just gave it in court, right?)

also says have evidence someone removed after court order

conerned about what happened to the people between court order and feb 2 hearing

(or removed right before court order?)


pg 20

	...THE COURT:  Well, wouldn't they have been people removed in violation of the order?

	MR. GELERNT:  Well, that's what I'm trying to say. There were people removed after the case and potent ially after -- and my colleague can give you more detail,  if you want to hear more.


says people were removed after the case and "potentially after" court order

if I remember right, DHS OIG found that court orders were followed (unquestionably?) at U.S. ports, violated overseas.

nope, don't remember right. Summary says this:

	At the ports of entry, CBP large ly complied with the court orders. We found some delay and confusion as to the scope of some of the orders. For example, CBPOs in Los Angeles discovered the existence of one of the early court orders, Danueesh v. Trump, by watching television, but did not receive immediate guidance, so continued returning affected travelers. However, we believe that CBP at the ports of entry attempted in good faith to obey court orders . In fact, we found evidence that at some ports, CBP went to extraordinary lengths to comply. For example, at Dulles, to comply with a court order in Aziz v. Trump, CBP managed to recall a taxiing aircraft that was about to depart with a denied traveler on board, so she could be admitted.


"largely complied"

and actually explicitly for Darweesh, says LA CBP learned about it on TV, didn't get "immediate guidance" and "continued returning affected travelers."

discussion of this came up in context of mootness--did violating court order keep it alive?

pg 21


also points out not moot since more people could come in and be detained...

pg 22


	...MS. TUMLIM:  Your Honor, if I may.  That is actuall y contrary to a report that we not only have directly  but that are put in sworn declarations before other courts a cross the country. So like the case that you do have, I'd like to poin t the Court's attention case to the Azad case, which  is in the Central District of California, it's 2:17-CV-00706. In that case, the individual was removed at 10:36 p.m. Eastern Time on Saturday after the order .  The sworn declaration in that case of Sara Yarjani stat es that at that time she was communicating to the border patro l agent,who withheld her for 23 hours, since her arrival at  LAX, and told them that a nationwide injunction was in place , to which the officer responded, quote, wowza. 

	THE COURT:  I'm sorry, I didn't hear what you said.

	MS. TUMLIM:  To which the officer responded, quote, wowza, end quote. Moreover, her declaration talks about how she was coerced to what's called withdraw her admission.  A nd so we're really concerned about this evidence, which we've h eard in more than one place, of individuals who, while they  were being detained at airports, were told that the only thing  they could do was to withdraw their application for admission  under their visa and accept voluntarily return.  And if they di d not, they would face multiple-year penalties on reentry.   So there are examples like this, Your Honor, and that's why we think the list is so critical to find  out --


points to one example of someone removed after court order, says she was coerced into withdrawing her admission.

order says cant remove people legally authorized to enter U.S. https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-NY-0053-0002.pdf

I guess not legally authorized to enter U.S. after signing form?


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15598


according to court doc and OIG summary, LAX and Azad v. Trump would be where violations of court order happened, but documents on the case are not publicly available.


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0084-0001.pdf

Azad about coercing detainees into signing away admission, filed after Darweesh order.

counts include being denied access to lawyers and detained without due process

specifically illegal to coerce people into signing away admission into U.S.


this violate court order?

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-DC-0025-0002.pdf
	Several similar cases have been filed around the Country in the last week. Counsel has not reviewed all of them in depth-more than fifty cases have been filed. 


maybe a lot of violations?

Here is la times on one named by lawyers (a spy?)

http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-deported-iranian-student-02012017-story.html
	The officer, she said, then told her that she had two choices: sign an agreement to leave voluntarily or be subject to forcible departure, which would ban her from reentering the country, possibly for longer than five years. 

	Yarjani said she was shocked and terrified and agreed to leave.


But she also told the CBP officer there was a nation-wide court order blocking exactly that, to which he replied "wowza"

so why did she sign away her admission?

78 year old grandma with diabetes being checked in and out of hopsital (Azad v. Trump) apparently tougher, smarter than Ms Yarjani.


	...Minutes before her flight departed, Yarjani was allowed to use her phone and saw messages about the judge’s stay from her family. She said she told an officer that it was now illegal to deport her, but the officer said “yowza” and did nothing.


says she didn't learn about court order until after she signed away admission


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0088-0001.pdf


this has a lot of good citations on Trump intent to make a Muslim ban



https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0030-0001.pdf

this cites Trump admin conflicting statements on application to LPRs



https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MD-0004-0001.pdf

pg 15

has a bit on how the text of the EO re-enforces stereotypes against Muslims


------

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MD-0004-0001.pdf

pg 16

"The Chaotic and Ireregular Implementation of the Order"


says bypassed Sec of DHS, defense, and state, CBP "not given clear operational guidance during critical times" in implementation

signed "without final review or legal analysis from DHS"

congress staff worked on order but signed NDAs, congress kept in dark

pg 17

"During the days leading up to and following the signing of the Executive Order, its scope and provisions were changed without any rational relationship to the purported reasons for the Order."

says Bannon overruled DHS guidance for not applying to LPRs (where are they getting this from?)


	...Similarly,  initial  guidance  from  the  Department  of  State  indicated  that  individuals  with dual citizenship, with one country of citizenship subject to the ban, would be banned from entering the United States.  Word of a change in that policy spread irregularly, with notice being given   to   airlines   and   foreign   nations   but   contradicted   in   official   U.S.   government   communications.


cites that gov changed course and allowed SIV from Iraq


Other  actions  taken  by  DHS  and  DOS  to
  enforce  the  Executive  Order  exhibit  a  
zealous desire to go beyond even the draconian
 measures the order actually requires


	Notwithstanding  that  Section  3  of  the  Ex
ecutive  Order  only  bars  “entry  into  the  
United States of aliens from” one of the afor
ementioned seven Muslim-majority countries, DHS 
interpreted  it  to  prohibit  the  granting  of  
any
  immigration-related  bene
fit  to  anyone  from  those  
countries—including  to  individual
s  who  are  already  in  the  United  
States.    That  decision  would  
have   wide-ranging   consequences
,   including:   delaying   naturaliz
ation   of   lawful   permanent   
residents  (“LPRs”)  from  those  countries  who  wish
  to  become  U.S.  citizens;  rendering  asylees  
from  those  countries  unable  to  be  lawfully
  employed  once  their  Employment  Authorization  
Documents  expire;  and  either  expelling  or  
making  undocumented  any  individuals  here  on  
nonimmigrant visas (including stude
nt, employment, and tourist) th
at otherwise could have been 
renewed. 


	DOS,  at  the  request  of  DHS,  issued  a  
letter  purporting  to  provisionally  revoke  
all
immigrant   and   nonimmigrant   visas   of   nationa
ls   of   the   seven   designated   countries   on   a   
categorical  basis.    The  letter  
is  dated  January  27,  2017,  but  only  
came  to  light  on  January  31,  
2017, when Department of Justice lawyers filed it 
in pending litigation. DOS 
has stated that this 
action was taken to “impleme
nt[]” the Executive Order

	On  information  and  belief,  DOS  has  neve
r  before  revoked  a  broad  swath  of  valid  
visas in this manner.  Nor, on information and be
lief, is visa revocation 
ordinarily undertaken in 
secret,  with  no  notice  to  the  visa  holder  and  
no  individualized  consider
ation  of  whether  any  
particular visa should be revoked. 


says DOS has never done a broad revokation of visas like this before

allegations are mostly problems brining over family members due to ban


------


I think I get it for Aziz v Trump and cases like that were they detained LPRs

at least a theory

at the time they were detained, nobody knew for sure or believed CBP was granting waivers and holding them for screening for waivers.

News articles say they were released after protests

then court documents say they were released after litigation started, and so are not moot


but if it turns out they were just following a policy of granting waiver excemptions all along to LPRs (clear as mud in public statements), can reveal that later after Yates gone and do better in court cases or win, make her look stupid/justify firing her


doesn't really work


admin statements, media by 29th saying LPRs being allowed through waivers

I guess the big question was whether they had been let through this way the whole time?

media tried to spin it as "before the ban applied to LPRs, now after Kelly's statement it doesn't"


which still does not help legally since this comes after the court cases

but from DHS OIG, DHS statements, (emails?) seems mostly clear that they were just letting them through on waivers the whole time

but did Yates know that? Courts?


------


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-immigration-chaos/chaos-anger-as-trump-order-halts-some-muslim-immigrants-idUSKBN15C0LD

Jan 28

	...At the State Department, a senior official said lawyers were working to interpret the executive order, which allows entry to people affected by the order when it is in the “national interest.”

	However, a federal law enforcement official said: “It’s unclear at this point what the threshold of national interest is.” 


didn't explain that very well


------


policy for letting in green card holders with waivers


created a lot of confusion

lawyers argued in court they were detained to be removed, not for extra screening

I think that showed up in Aziz and Louhghalam



in wash petition argued this meant the EO applied to LPRs



WH communication on this point even worse

Gillian Christensen says "it will bar LPRs"

a bunch of anonymous officials give conflicting or confusing statements

"case by case basis," not clear who will be let in and who will not


------

courts seemed to really dislike stranding LPRs overseas

showed up in hearing for Louhghalam v. Trump, courts asked about that a lot

also was main point of Mohammad v. United States, and got TRO next day

in both cases was TRO on entire EO

but admin kept issuing "no board" instructions violating both of these

in the end don't think this came up in Wash v. Trump?

but it's odd, apparently wash v. Trump wasn't even needed after Mohammad v. United States, which ended ban nationwide


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15634&search=source%7Cgeneral%3BspecialCollection%7C44%3Borderby%7CfilingYear%3B


says don't know if WH guidance to CBP would allow LPRs

says "upon information and belief" due process rights being violated by "defendants continued removal" of lawful permanent residents.

Where did they get that idea?

basically whole court case wouldn't exist if admin explained themselves

gov's initial motion to dismiss might show that they knew this, but the document has been blocked for release
