

petition for habeaus corups and injunctive relief:


filed Jan 28

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0001.pdf

two returning LPRs detained

satement of facts:

	14. In statements to the press in connection with his issuance of the EO, President Trump stated that his order would help Christian refugees to enter the United States. 


cites Trump statement about Christian refugees


	26. Petitioner Tootkaboni is being detained at Logain Airport and not being permitted  to go home, in violation of the U.S. law

	...33. Counsel  for  Petitioner  Louhghalam  have  attempted  to  make  contact  with  her  at Logan Airport but have been unsuccessful due to Petitioner Louhghalam’s detention.

	...35. Petitioner Louhghalam is being detained at Logain Airport and not being permitted to go home, in violation of the U.S. law.

	36. Congress has provided that lawful permanent residents in Petitioners’ situation are entitled to enter the United States. Under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(13)(C), a lawful permanent resident is regarded as seeking an admission into the United States for purposes of the immigration laws” only if he or she “has abandoned or relinquished that status,” id. § 1101(a)(13)( C)(i), has been absent from the United States for more than 180 days continuously, is in removal proceedings, has committed one of a class of enumerated offenses, or has attempted to enter without inspection. 


cites Rosenberg v. Flueti, immigration statutes for returning LPRs

	...As a lawful permanent residents of the United States, Petitioners are attempting to return home.  They have been left in limbo while detained by the Respondents for no reason other than the discriminatory and unconstitutional EO


so this isn't saying anything about facing removal, just that they are being unlawfully detained in violation of 5th ammendment


is this true? DHS OIG found that the detention wasn't different from any other sort of secondary screning, and LPRs let in with waiver system

in prayer for relif, ask for "in injuction ordering Respondents not o detain any individual solely on the basis of the EO;"

later in hearing they mention LPRs stranded due to EO, and send a proposed order that includes orderinng CBP to contact airlines and notify them of the court order:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0005.pdf


court in order on 29th says this:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0002.pdf
	The petitioners have met their burden of establishing a strong likelihood of success in establishing that the detention and/or removal of the petitioners and others similarly situated would violate their rights to Due Process and Equal Protection as guaranteed by the United States Constitution; 


didn't talk about this much in hearing, so can't say which argument in particular convinced the court

order says LPRs or anyone else shall not be detained or removed due to EO, orderes CBP to tell airlines this

------

If I remember right, the most apparnet reason they lost this one was that DOJ lawyers didn't know anything


if courts, lawyers knew that LPRs were being admitted on waiver, would they still have gotten a TRO?


court order says:

	...Absent a stay of removal, petitioners and others similarly situated, including lawful permanent residents, citizens, visa-holders, approved refugees, and other individuals from nations who are subject to the January 27, 2017 Executive Order, are likely to suffer irreparable harm.


which is true. LPRs maybe not, but approved refugees, citizens bring over family would

LPRs I guess would suffer harm due to uncertainty, but that's not what plaintiff's argued


hearing:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0004.pdf


pg 4

court says "familiar with what happened in Virginia" then asks "where are we here?"

but what happened in Aziz case makes it look like admin was planning on detaining LPRs then was stopped by court order.


Plantiff counsel says plaintiffs released, but asing court to rule "on the grounds that, first of all, that this case was filed by the emergency phone call tot his Court at 7:30 p.m. this afternoon when both of these individuals were still in custody; and second of all, on the grounds that there are many other flights scheduled to come into Logan tomorrow."


if CBP's LPR policy was known, this argument wouldn't work. Would be able to convincingly argue they were released after "secondary screening" and further LPRs would be detained then released the same way, which is what happened.


pg 5

plantiffs try to argue why they need a new order on top of Darweesh


says their problem with the national order is "it only protects people from removal" and second "is that it specifically does not include lawful permanent residents. ...doesn't quite clearly cover the grounds of people who are lawful permanent resident who pursuant to 8 USC 1101(a)(13)(C) are entitled to present themselves at the board and not seek admission."


This wouldn't work either if admin had been more clear on LPR policy.

It would be hard to argue LPRs were being detained as if they were seeking admission. Could use analogy of extra screening for people returning from dangerous countries, which even happens for citizens.

But the way the admin presented it and the way Aziz went you'd think they were just holding LPRs until the TRO expired and they could send them back


pg 7

fed lawyer has no info on CBP not letting "individuals" board plane to the U.S.


then pg 9 plantiff says "A representative of the Attorney General's Office has told us that there are families currently in Egypt who all are lawful permanent residents who are all -- local Boston residents who were all sent back and not allowed to board a plane."


How does the fed lawyer not know about any instances of this but a "representive of the attorney General's office" does?

plantiff attorney says "confident" can get affidavit of them later but never does

never saw anything like this in media reports

lying?

pg 10

court asks what jurisdiction do we have for airlines letting people over?

plantiff says airlines not allowing people on due to EO

media reports say CBP told airlines to allow LPRs to board

some emails suggest TSA officials told airlines there is a "green card ban", other airlines confused, others no guidance


this argument works for the TRO

DHS OIG also found CBP "very aggresive" on not allowing people to board


even still, DHS has a better defense than this: they apparntly just wanted to let LRPs in after screening and give waiver

could argue, maybe or maybe not convincingly, that airlines were merely "overinterpretting our guidance" and only ever barred LPRs due to chaos of implementation


pg 10

	MR> SEGAL: Good evening, Your Honors. So just to back up, I thin what Ms. Church is talking about is what might happen in an amended complaint.


Didn't want to talk about it?

goes back to the mootness argument


	...Courts have been pretty clear that just releasing somebody when a lawsuit's filed is not enough to make a case moot.


Segal shifts from stronger argument to TRO to weaker one, which admin still can't argue against for some reason.


	...Mr. Farquhar makes the point that the government would like to take some time to sort this out.

	Well, the most appropriate way to sort this out would not be to leave thousands of people in peril of being detained, you know, all over the country, but also here in Boston when they arrive, including the folks who are set to arrive at 7:40 in the morning.

	...The second thing we asked for was an injunction ordering the respondents not to detain and implicitly not to send across the globe people who are arriving, any individual, solely on the basis of the executive order.

	And I think the case is not moot, and it is certainly appropriate to the issue that kind of relief; particularly as the government, as it wants to do, sorts out, tries to create and even-handed approach, and as we look to see whether an amended complaint might be appropriate, whether on behalf of the people that Ms. Church mentioned or somebody else.


so Seagal wants to leave people stranded later for an "ammended complaint"

wonder about the families stranded in egypt, seems like the strongest case, kindof weird to brush away

Seagal shifts argument to say need TRO to stop "any individual" (and I guess "particularly LPRs" not covered by darweesh) from being detained or removed


pg 14

Farquar countering

	The only individuals that have been brough to my attention were the two individuals that were mentioned here. That does not necessarily mean that if someone else comes in, they're going to be detained.


either throwing case on purpose or doesn't know CBP LPR policy

Trump admin would probably argue lying, DOJ "sabotaging" him

which is true? apparently admin not telling DOJ much


	At this point, Your Honor, unfortunately given the fact that it is the weekend, it has been a little more difficult to get in touch with folks in DC that are high enough to, in fact, execute some type of an order for the rest of the country to react. And so we're moving as quickly as we can, but right now I can't state what the United States is going to do.


checks out with other reports--DOJ not told of EO ahead of time, not consulted for any review or prepared for legal defense

doesn't agree with Yates testimony, which says there were contacts between admin and DOJ over weekend on how to defend

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	LEAHY: Was the White House trying to tell the Justice Department how to carry out that executive order?

	YATES: Well, I didn't have a lot of discussion with the White House about this executive order. They -- I'm sorry. I don't entirely understand the question.

	LEAHY: No, but I mean, did anybody from the White House try to direct the Justice Department how they should respond on that executive order?

	YATES: Well, certainly there was discussion with the White House about litigation strategy, but that occurred, to my knowledge, over the weekend. But, after the 30th, when I issued my directive, I was gone then that evening around 9:00, so I don't know what other discussions occurred after that.


Yates discussed EO with WH, DOJ discussed "litigation strategy" with WH over the weekend

so why does this guy know nothing?


back to hearing

pg 14

	
	MAG. JUDGE DEIN: The individual that's supposed to land tomorrow morning, what are the details about that?

	MS. CHURCH: It's tomorrow evening Attorney Doyle will --

	MR. SEGAL: I think we've been in touch separately throughout the day with her as people --

	I know that our office has been in touch with someone or the family member of someone who's due to arrive at, I think, 7:40 in the morning.

	And to Mr. Farquhar's point, I mean, the question really is whether --


like he doesn't want Church to talk about people stranded overseas due to EO? keeps interrupting her


	I mean, we're all in favor of the government sorting this out, but I mean, the worry is that if it isn't sorted out by virtue of an order from this Court enjoining action, then policy's going to be made by individual Customs and Border Patrol agents starting at 7:40 a.m. tomorrow.


This sounds true, accurate summary

because of chaos, policy ends up up to individual CBP agents, airline personel, and by virtue of cases they clearly sometimes wrongfully detain, refuse travel, remove people

Farquhar interjects, saying "my office is in direct contact with them including the SAC for the Boston area."

then says again "at this point there is no gurantee that anyone's going to be detained at the airport who falls under this scenario."

why weak argument?

say CBP policy

say it's secondary screening for dangerous countries

would eventually lose ("constitutionally vague," is Muslim ban) but might stop TRO, right?


	...JUDGE BURROUGHTS: Well, have you spoken to them about what their intention is with regards to people that continue to land over the weekend?

	MR. FARQUAR: At this point, Your Honor, they were supposed to get back to me in about an hour's time, and that would put us well into the morning. So I don't have that answer right now.

	My suggestion to them was that we continue to allow individuals that are lawful permanent residents to enter the United States while this is being sorted out nationwide.


this is key question

apparently admin in contact with this lawyer, but didn't think to tell him this before the hearing (or was it that his phone died?) he was "attempting -- or at least was attempting until phone died -- to reach some folks out of MAIN Justice to ascertain how we may be able to coordinate this through Washington, DC."

apparently, Farqhar didn't get any answers, but tells court he advised admin to "continue" letting in LPRs while sorting things out nationwide.


pg 16


chruch wants to "chime on" on the "urgency issue" right after Farquar says above

church says admin violating court orders, and might have been because confused on whether is national or not, so want someting local so Boston CBP understands

then brings up doyle and his stranded returning LPR client

doyle says he is concerned his client will be detained trying to fly in from Iran next morning

says it is CBPs position that those detained are denied access to counsel, "ad we're very concerned that individuals that we haven't been able to reach at this point may be put back on a plane, because Customs and Border Patrol have the authority to deport somebody from the airport without any kind of judicial review even with an immigration court."

says returning LPRs are not subject to insepction at admission according to statutes


so their argument for why it is urgent includes CBP violating court orders, and returning LPRs might be detained unlawfully without access to a lawyer and deported


pg 18

neither lawyer has talked to their detained clients

doyle able to talk to one client in detention


pg 19

	JUDGE BURROUGHS: What are the classifications of people that are not supposed to be put into secondary inspection?

	MS. DOYLE: It would be U.S. citizens, and then returning permanent residents who -- other than those that are under 8 USC Section 1101(a)(13)(C), which is specifically people who have been outside the country more than 180 days, persons with certian types of criminal convictions, persons who may have been engaged in unlawful criminal behavior during their time apart.

	There's six specific conditions in which lawful permanent residents can be considered to be applicants for admission, but other than that, they are not.


How are they arguing CBP considering these LPRs applicants for admission? I guess that they face removal proceedings?

don't think would hold up to facts, if they were known...

	
	JUDGE BURROUGHS: So you'll have to pardon me. It's not an area of the law I'm hugely familiar with. But are they allowed to put htem in to secondary inspection to find out if they satisfy one of those six categories?

	MS. DOYLE: They may be entitled to ask some questions to see if they're subject to these six items.

	But the executive order that was issued by the president does not address any of those issues and, in fact, bring up specific grounds in which they wish to try to keep people from returning to the United States that are not even cited in the Immigration At and are above and beyond those particular items.

	So from our understanding, yeah, again, this is somewhat ancedotal at this point, that most people are being questioned as to their religions or religious beliefs and so forht as opposed to any of these specific things. We'll have to follow up with the people who've been released.


plaintiffs argue LPRs are being detained under EO for purpose of keeping them out of the country, anecdotes that "most" not being asked questions about categories that could bar them re-entry but about their religion.

DHS FAQ says only one LPR barred entry under the waiver process, someone who had committed crime and so coudn't return.

guidance was to screen them for "significant derogatory information," which could be anything...

is this argument true? can you legally have a policy of detaining and seeking "derogatory information" on returning LPRs? citizens?

seems like TSA can do that, randomly screen you

for EO, they were seeking "significant derogatory information" for the purpose of barring them entry, according to guidance. Only time that ever used was for something lawful anyway.


pg 22

Judge Borroughs asks "Mr. Segal, do you have a copy of Clark vs. Martinez?"


Clark v. Martinez ruled that aliens can't be held for deportation proceedings more than 90 days.

Why did Judge ask that?

I geuss ruling would let them detain the LPRs for 90 days? if found inadmissible.

maybe that's why they made the ban 90 days

previously cited it for something about mootness.

Segal says not familiar, something about ammending case later with people stranded overseas, and that can expect repitition because of this.

borroughs says "Hold on. I just pulled up the case. Just let me take a look at the footnote."

segal says something about mootness doctrine


not sure what's going on here. For whatever reason seems like Segal wanted to ignore people on flights overseas. I guess clark v. Martinez might let them argue don't need to include them since not moot due to how petitioners were released. Then judge starts reading copy of Clark v. Martinez and Seagal changes argument to say there might be repition because people flying from overseas will go through same thing.


pg 24

Judge Dein asks Segal about class, problem that they don't have a class, and are talking about different people in differnt situations (presumably detained vs. overseas stranded)


Segal says "some of those plaintiffs might have to be separately represented wouldn't be a reason to dismiss this case where there's a non-moot case before the Court and an opportunity to certify -- to seek to certify a class of similarly-situated petitioners in the morning."


why not just include stranded in his class and have a stronger case?

while Segal sounds like h'e struggling, Doyle says his client in same class as main plantiffs, a "returning permanent resident."

says they might be paroled


pg 26

Farquhar says main concern is people continuing to come in and getting turned back, proposes an order saying nobody can be deported without first contacting U.S. attorney's office.


	...In the interim, the United States certainly, Your Honor, between today and tomorrow, I'm sure we're going to have many conversations with DC to try to figure out a national approach to try to solve this problem for now.


Why didn't they have these conversations earlier?


farquar says no jurisdiction over arlines boarding overseas

Church chimes in, says has a solution, "I would think that we would have jurisdiction over CBP sending out notices to the airlines that they regularly interface with."

sounds like talking about AQQ or SF or whatever they call it, "no board" messages

But the order didn't tell them to sending "no board" messages, it told CBP to inform airlines of court order

then Church say "if they are instructed that the current law in Boston is that they must allow these individuals on the plane ... that these arilines would follow."


pg 28

Farquhar points out that if CBP were directing airlines not to board LPRs, they wouldn't be in court in the first place. Says "I think that what's happening overseas is that the executive order's being interpreted without necessarily guidance from CBP."


pg 29

	MAG. JUDGE DEIN: Well, under either of those scenarios what you're saying, though, is that we shouldn't at this juncture issue an order against the foreign entities. Its here, and then they can choose whether or not they're going to listen. And that goes to Mr. Farquhar's argument that they're interpreting the executive order on their own.

	MR. SEGAL: Yes. I'm being told that you're exactly right, Your Honor.


since text of EO barred LPRs on face, admin gave conflicting statements, chaos of rollout, would be easy to argue this.

CBP did give guidance to airlines, but Farquhar for whatever reason was unable to point to this in court.


pg 31

farquhar has absolutely nothing to say when challenged that complaints are valid and order is illegal. Says just doesn't know anything.


...


why did they lose?

mostly talked about due process, problems with detaining people and people stuck overseas

darweesh and aziz didn't cover detaining people, not specific enough in applying to LPRs

defendent couldn't answer what admin intended to do going foward, plaintiffs point out if no TRO, policy up to "individual CBP agents"

judges seemed more intrested in people overseas beeing denied boarding than some of the plantiffs lawyers


