
https://www.propublica.org/article/trump-executive-order-could-block-legal-residents-from-returning-to-america

info, summary, 500K LPRs from those countries


------


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
	It took nearly two hours from when President Trump signed his first attempt at a travel ban for the head of United States Customs and Border Protection to get an official version of the president’s executive order.

	In the hours that followed, officials scrambled to figure out how to enforce the order and — as protesters, lawyers and politicians swarmed airports — they monitored the demonstrations with detailed granularity, setting up a “Crisis Action Team” to coordinate their response.

	As officials begin to roll out President Trump’s latest attempt to severely restrict visitors from certain countries, internal documents provided to The New York Times offer a look at how the government tried to carry out his initial attempt at a travel ban.


nytimes given documents showing chaos of travel ban

Matt Stevens a bit suspicious though


	...Gene Hamilton, a senior counselor at the Department of Homeland Security, wrote that green card holders should generally be given a case-by-case exemption, “provided that it is in the national interest to do so (i.e. provided that there is no security risk posed, meaning that there should be a revetting of sorts).”


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
    Emails detail the back and forth between officials as they tried to figure out whether the order was applicable to green card holders. Soon after Mr. McAleenan got the signed order, he asked about that issue.

	Gene Hamilton, a senior counselor at the Department of Homeland Security, wrote that green card holders should generally be given a case-by-case exemption, “provided that it is in the national interest to do so (i.e. provided that there is no security risk posed, meaning that there should be a revetting of sorts).”

	That response appeared to surprise Mr. McAleenan, who noted that under such an interpretation, the number of travelers affected would significantly increase. “We have 300 in the air inbound right now,” he said in an email, adding, “wanted to flag this as our understanding has changed.”


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf
	Petitioners are 50 to 60 Lawful Permanent Residents (“LPRs”) currently detained at Dulles Airport. Respondents have detained these individuals or otherwise barred them from exiting the airport or continuing their transit into the United States. Respondents have denied these individuals access to lawyers. Upon information and belief, respondents imminently intend to remove these individuals from the United States.


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
	The documents show agency officials over the next several days held conference calls and drafted memos to guide employees on how to carry out the order and how to report their progress. Some memos explained who had the authority to grant waivers for green card holders, and documents also show officials sent requests for those waivers.

	On Feb. 1, Don McGahn, counsel to President Trump, sent a memo clarifying the order did not apply to green card holders after all.

	Two days later, a federal judge in Seattle temporarily blocked Mr. Trump’s order from being enforced nationwide.

	At 8:23 p.m. that day, there was a memo from Mr. McAleenan that read in part, “suspend any and all actions.”

NY times said emails show officils tried to guide employees on how to respond, OIG report says otherwise

------


https://www.politico.com/story/2017/11/20/homeland-security-travel-ban-253902
	Records obtained by POLITICO through an ongoing Freedom of Information Act lawsuit underscore concerns by DHS personnel that there was no clear guidance about how to interpret the first order.

	"We got a memo from the White House saying one thing and now the Press Secretary said another," a senior CBP official wrote to an American Airlines executive in a Feb. 1 email explaining why the agency just abruptly withdrew guidance sent to major international air carriers.

feb 1 is McGahn's memo--is that what this is talking about?

won't be able to know for sure (for now)

best guess:

referring to hamilton memo at first

then DHS says LPRs not allowed




------


https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/01/29/dhs-statement-compliance-court-orders-and-presidents-executive-order

https://www.dhs.gov/news/2017/01/29/statement-secretary-john-kelly-entry-lawful-permanent-residents-united-states

http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/ct-priebus-trump-executive-order-20170129-story.html


DHS, Kelly, and Preibus all say LPRs not affected by EO on 29th

too late by then--court orders already in


------

what is the "white house memo" and "press secutrary" statements FOIA email referring to?


apparently memo was first, "press secretary" statement second

best guess is that the "press secretary" statement is the DHS saying the ban doesn't apply to LPRS?


-------

look at sequence of events:




https://www.oig.dhs.gov/file/4678/download?token=kEDXANI_
	We found:

	* The leadership of CBP, the OHS entity primarily responsible for implementation of the order, had virtually no warning that the EO was to be issued or of the scope of the order, and was caught by surprise. Indeed, during the early period of implementation of the order, neither CBP nor the Department was sure of the answers to basic questions as to the scope of the order, such as whether the order applied to Lawful Permanent Residents (LPRs), a significant percentage of the affected travelers and a fundamental question that should have been resolved early in the process.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html
	Friday night, DHS arrived at the legal interpretation that the executive order restrictions applying to seven countries -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Sudan and Yemen -- did not apply to people with lawful permanent residence, generally referred to as green card holders. 

	The White House overruled that guidance overnight, according to officials familiar with the rollout. That order came from the President's inner circle, led by Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon. Their decision held that, on a case by case basis, DHS could allow green card holders to enter the US.


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
    Emails detail the back and forth between officials as they tried to figure out whether the order was applicable to green card holders. Soon after Mr. McAleenan got the signed order, he asked about that issue.

	Gene Hamilton, a senior counselor at the Department of Homeland Security, wrote that green card holders should generally be given a case-by-case exemption, “provided that it is in the national interest to do so (i.e. provided that there is no security risk posed, meaning that there should be a revetting of sorts).”

	That response appeared to surprise Mr. McAleenan, who noted that under such an interpretation, the number of travelers affected would significantly increase. “We have 300 in the air inbound right now,” he said in an email, adding, “wanted to flag this as our understanding has changed.”

	The documents show agency officials over the next several days held conference calls and drafted memos to guide employees on how to carry out the order and how to report their progress. Some memos explained who had the authority to grant waivers for green card holders, and documents also show officials sent requests for those waivers.


https://www.politico.com/story/2017/11/20/homeland-security-travel-ban-253902
	Records obtained by POLITICO through an ongoing Freedom of Information Act lawsuit underscore concerns by DHS personnel that there was no clear guidance about how to interpret the first order.

	"We got a memo from the White House saying one thing and now the Press Secretary said another," a senior CBP official wrote to an American Airlines executive in a Feb. 1 email explaining why the agency just abruptly withdrew guidance sent to major international air carriers.


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/department-of-homeland-security-secretary-entry-of-lawful-permanent-residents-in-national-interest-john-kelly/
	January 29, 2017

	Entry of lawful permanent residents in "national interest," DHS secretary says

	“In applying the provisions of the president’s executive order, I hereby deem the entry of lawful permanent residents to be in the national interest,” said the statement, released two days after President Trump signed an executive order banning people from seven countries from entering the U.S.


https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/trump-muslim-ban-green-card-holders
	White House reverses course on green card holders

	...During a round of Sunday show interviews, Trump’s aides stressed that just a small portion of travelers had been affected by the order, which temporarily bars the citizens of seven majority Muslim nations from entering the country. The aides also reversed course and said that citizens of those countries who hold permanent U.S. residency “green cards” will not be barred from re-entering the country, as officials had previously said.


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/02/us/trump-travel-ban.html
	On Feb. 1, Don McGahn, counsel to President Trump, sent a memo clarifying the order did not apply to green card holders after all.



so at first, not sure at what time ("soon after" Kevin got the signed order), WH directs to apply to LPRs basically according to EO, "case by case"

Kevin points out this isn't so great--they have 300 LPRs "in the air right now"

they say well apply for waivers, and that is what they do

for whatever reason they had to tell CBP who to ask for waivers

DHS OIG finds they got a lot of waivers for LPRs:

	The bulk of the travelers affected by the EO who arrived in the United States, particularly LPRs, received national interest waivers . We found that the waiver process was largely pro-forma, and that none of the travelers received scrutiny greater upon referral to secondary inspection than they would have received in the absence of the EO. Nor did we find any evidence that CBP detected any traveler link ed to terrorism based on the additional procedures required by the EO.


but, apparently, not everyone got a waiver, and enough were detained anyway to lead to court orders. DHS OIG cites some detained:

	We found that the lack of a public or congressional relations strategy significantly hampered CBP. For example, in Aziz v. Trump, a federal court had temporarily enjoined CBP at Dulles airport in Virginia from returning LPRs. The court had also ordered CBP to "permit lawyers access to all [LPRs] being detained at Dulles .... " CBP complied with the order not to remove LPRs and soon after the TRO issued, processed for entry the remaining five LPRs held in secondary inspection. However, CBP did not communicate that LPRs were not being denied access to lawyers either to the public or in response to Congressional inquiries, resulting in significant public protests and suspicion that CBP was not complying with a court order.


apparently this policy stays in place until 29th?

then on 29th a bunch of officials, Kelly, come out and say "admit LPRs"

and CBP officials are confused: WH said one thing, now these press statements are saying another (inferring from politico FOIA email)

regardless, CBP keeps violating two of the initial court orders:

violated Boston order and NY order, dunno if they did for LPRs or not

how did they manage to violate NY order with "no board" requests? the order says they can't deport people in U.S...

did it say they can't detain either?

it bars them from "removing" them


...


https://law.yale.edu/system/files/area/clinic/document/8_-_order_granting_stay.pdf

Darweesh v. Trump, 1st one, orders that they can't deport people based on EO

then Wh comes and says ignore that order (or maybe not, confusing)

CBP also ignoring orders and sending these "no board" requests

hearing, with fed lawyer present, also says there are large families of LPRs stranded due to order

so you'd think feds know LPRs stranded by the 28th, or that courts are nailing them for that


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0002.pdf

Boston case on early 29th

says they can't detain LRPs going to Logan

this one was a "temporary restraining order" I guess applying to MA only


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0001.pdf

Aziz v. Trump was also a TRO

...


so they were confused as to wether EO applied to LPRS

"guidance" was basically the text of the EO verbatum

so they grant waivers "pro forma" and a lot get through

but not all, enough not getting through, for whatever reason, to create court cases that WH can't win. Families are getting stranded, MIT application canelled, etc.

to guess: someone deicdes not to grant waivers? also hints of confusion as to who is responsible for this

so on 29th, Kelly and others come out and say: being LPR and coming in is in "national interest." Specifically, Kelly is clarifing waiver "national interest" clause in EO

but apparently some at CBP still confused, as per politico FOIA email

CBP violating court orders all over the place

finally (not really) on Feb 1 McGahn "clarify's" the EO does not apply to EOs (it does on it's face), and they try to argue in court that this makes EO ok


...

so what happened to make it end up that LPRs got stranded?

decided a security risk/"not in national interest" and refused waiver?

writing waivers took too long? (e.g. didn't know who was responsible for writing?) (and Kevin says "we have 300 in the air right now" so, I guess would have to write those fast.)

didn't start waiver for some people (as in didn't know they needed one/existed)?

And for the "no board" orders, how does it work? are you detained first, then they write you a waiver? Would mean you miss your flight and stuck in, according to Trump admin, a "dangerous country," at least temporarily.

DHS OIG says the "bulk" got waivers--which ones didn't and why? why not even after Kelly says "admitting LPRs is in national interest"? And why did it take them so long to set that policy? why were CBP (apparently) still confused?


what was WH initial policy on LPRs? OIG basically says CBP were confused. NY times email says this:

	“provided that it is in the national interest to do so (i.e. provided that there is no security risk posed, meaning that there should be a revetting of sorts).”

and CBS report says kelly/preibus statement was a "reversal" of what they previously said (when? what?)


...


from Yates hearing:

	...KLOBUCHAR: And then moving forward here, as was mentioned by Senator Durbin, this order was (inaudible) after a lawsuit from the State of Washington and Minnesota, the court basically challenged -- the constitutionality of the order. The order is now taken effect, but what I want to get to right now is the fact that the administration then withdrew its request for an appeal of the court ruling blocking implementation of the same order and then they changed the order that you would not implement.

	YATES: Right. And there were a number of important distinctions between travel ban one and travel ban two. At the time I had to make my decision for example, the executive order still applied to green card holders, lawful permanent residents and those who had visas.

	There were a number of other distinctions as well. And look, let me say ...


so as far as DOJ could tell, EO still legally applied to LPRs when she "had to make her decsion"

...

reportedly, DHS at fist arrived at legal interpretation that the EO did not apply to LPRs. Then they were "overruled" by WH, saying to admit on "case by case basis." This agrees with email reported by NY Times. Sounds like DHS thinks it does not apply to LPRs are first, asks for clarification, and basically gets that they can "case by case exempctions," presumably waivers (since OIG DHS report says "bulk" given waivers), basically a way to admit LPRs within confines of text of EO.

So I think it's this: DHS wants to not apply to LPRs at all as policy, WH says apply to LPRs, but work around within confines of EO (in a kind of confusing way if email is all that is said). Some LPRs are detained, stranded anyway, and basically the workaround doesn't work, and court cases are popping up everywhere. Apparently the confusion around this is realized on the 29th when kelly says "LRPs admitted is in national interest." Even still there is confusion around this (politico FOIA email), and so McGahn feels he has to issue his clarification on Feb 1.

All the White House had to do was say the EO does not apply to LPRs.

I think a see a strategy here: media reports focus a lot on the "confusion" about the order. As far as I can tell, the WH never explicitly said "apply the travel ban to LPRs" (equivalen to "leave those lawful U.S. residents stranded.") At the same time, they never clarified completely, maybe utnil Feb 1 (even then not sure), that LPRs were exempt. They left it confsing enough to let some LPRs get stranded and unwinnable court cases pop up while being able to absolve themselves of blame. Crucially, when Yates had to make her decision, the text of the EO and the White House's official position on the EO was still that it applied to LPRs (with workarounds or otherwise) while all those court cases were in play. It would not have been sufficient to argue in court that there were workarounds for LPRs for someone who the workaround didn't work for.


...


did the McGahn memo actually mean the EO no longer apply to LPRs? the courts didn't buy it (at least Washington state), but Yates says "at the time, the EO still applied to LPRs," so maybe it's reasonable to say it did change the meaning, could reasonably be interpreted that way (actually no, she was talking specifically in the context of "travel ban 1" vs "travel ban 2")

Related, also noteworthy that gov lawyers poitned to the McGahn memo to say the EO did not apply to LPRs, so apparently it's not a legally insane thing to say, like could be reasonable, and help them in court. In the Boston case, courts said that because of this memo, the issue of the EO applying to LPRs was moot. Which begs the question: why didn't they issue the memo until after the court orders, and after Yates resigned?

Question is more poignent when considering WH's initial workaround was weird, and didn't work. Again, once problems with LRPs are realized (apparently Kevin, DHS informed them of these), the obvious thing to do is to immediately take official position that EO does not apply to LPRs, like McGahn memo or something even stronger (considering problems in court, did not think WH counsel statement sufficient). Instead, they chose an unusual and confusing fix that helped make them look better (as if they were trying to not strand people) but did not help them legally--it affected how the EO was implimented, but not how it was interpreted legally. They didn't bother to try to "clarify" it legally until after Yates was fired.


...

put it this way:

If, all other things the same, the EO applies to LPRs, the moment even one LPR gets detained or sent back and the ACLU goes to court, no more travel ban. It's legally finished. You just signed an order that denied constitutional due process to a lawful resident of the United States.

The WH had two solutions to this problem that we are certain they knew about:

1. The obvious one: "clarify," ammend, reinterpret the EO so that it does not apply to LPRs, more or less like McGahn's memo.

2. The solution they went with at first: have a workaround based on the text of the EO that is confusing, error prone, (probably) slow, that they by any reasonable inference knew was confusing and wasn't working for all LPRs, and that cannot be used as a legal defense should it fail.

Until after Yates was fired, the White House went with solution 2 over solution 1. This does not do them any favors *unless* their intent was to fire the acting attorney general.

Granted, all of this is based off inference from media reports. The DHS OIG report might shed more light on this, except it has been mysteriously blocked for release by the administration...


...


if tourist has to cancel vacation next week, maybe not so bad

if lawful resident can't come back to visit dying mother suddenly without notice...

this applies for the emergency TRO: basically they weighed the injury gov claimed vs. injury plaintiffs claimed (this in Wash doc summary for denying gov stay to tro)

how does it apply to case against consitutionality of ban? cancel vacation an injury, not irreperable, but injury... would they have to weigh against gov injury? doesn't make sense if the whole argument is law unconstitutional.

in wash case, states included reparable injuries: lost tuition fees.

pretty sure only weighed for the temporary/ "likelihood" thing

but LPRs important: denying constitutional rights for a tourist might not pass supreme court. But for lawful resident? would be pretty hard...

ok, I think this is wrong? "the stronger the standing, the stronger the liklihood the law will get struck down"

not true for going all the way with court argument, just need some standing

but is true for the temporary restraining order

see section "The Balance of Hardships and the Public Interest"

since ban is temporary, trump could even got away with unconstitutional ban if he made sure this balance didn't go so far out of his favor

significance of LPRs, as far as I can tell, is supreme court almost certainly won't argue they have no rights

doing "more harm" to them also roughly correlates to what rights violated, right? actually, now that I think about it, if tourist visa canclled with  notice, no rights violated? not sure. But if resident detained without notice, no lawyer, no way to appeal, then a problem

so it's true but wrong to say "stronger standing the stronger liklyhood"



------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/29/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban-green-card-dual-citizens/index.html

Says Preibus contradicting himself on statement on green card holders allowed, admin initially barred green card holders and overulled DHS


http://www.latimes.com/politics/washington/la-na-trailguide-updates-unknown-number-of-u-s-permanent-1485627539-htmlstory.html
	Jan. 28, 2017, 10:18 a.m.
	
	Unknown number of U.S. permanent residents stuck overseas as a result of Trump's immigration ban 

	An undetermined number of longtime U.S. residents have been stranded overseas as a result of President Trump's executive order temporarily blocking visas from seven countries in the Middle East and North Africa.

	All visa holders from those seven countries are now barred entry to the U.S., including lawful permanent residents, also known as green card holders, people with U.S. work visas and other types of visas, according to a senior U.S. immigration official. The official spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.

	Some of the affected countries, such as Yemen and Libya, have relatively few nationals who are U.S. permanent residents or visa holders. But a large number of Iranians have permanent residency in the U.S., as do smaller numbers from some of the other countries on the list, which includes Iraq, Syria, Somalia and Sudan.

	Trump's executive order, issued Friday, immediately affected longtime foreign residents of the U.S. who were overseas at the time the order was signed, as well as any high-skilled tech workers or other work-visa holders from those seven countries caught outside the U.S. as of Friday.

	Lawyers at the Department of Homeland Security are examining Trump's executive order and drafting instructions for border officials, the official said.

	Eventually, the administration may set up a way for some visa holders to apply for a waiver from the ban, but that is still being deliberated and will take time to set up, the official said.

	Lawyers at DHS are scrambling to understand the order and parse out what it means for procedures at airport checkpoints and ports of entry around the country.

	Most senior DHS officials were not aware of the coming changes before they were released Friday. Immigration and customs officers are struggling to figure out which incoming travelers to let in while at the same time keep up with the normal flow of travel, the senior US immigration official said. 


says as of Jan 28, DHS will "eventually" have waivers to get them through


------


http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-trump-immigration-ban-court-met-20170201-story.html
	Both cases had been set for hearings Wednesday. But after hours of behind-the-scenes negotiating with an assistant U.S. attorney, customs officials and the State Department, the two ended with the same announcement — neither traveler should have been barred from re-entering the country based on the president's executive order, and both would be coming home.

	...Earlier Wednesday, lawyers for the Iranian-born businessman, who filed under the pseudonym John Doe, negotiated a similar arrangement with U.S. officials. The man is an Iranian citizen and legal permanent resident of the U.S. who lives in Chicago with his wife and three children.

	According to his lawsuit, the man had flown to Iran last month to care for his sick mother. He was planning to return to Chicago in time for the birth of his first grandchild, but when he tried to book a return flight Saturday, the ticketing agency "refused to issue a ticket for his travel to the United States due to the executive order," the suit said.

	The man's lawyer, Taher Kameli, said he agreed to withdraw his emergency request to stop enforcement of Trump's executive order after government officials determined his client's travel should not be restricted under the new policy.

	"The government was very cooperative, and they agreed that the executive order does not apply to permanent residents," Kameli told reporters.

	Meanwhile, the underlying claims in that lawsuit alleging Trump's executive order is unconstitutional will go forward before U.S. District Judge Samuel Der-Yeghiayan.



this was reported on 28th

why did these guys get their cases dropped but not others?

on 28th, gov officials negotiating with his lawyer tell him the EO does not apply to permanent residents



another LPR stranded:


http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-green-card-iranian-artist-met-20170130-story.html


in contact with lawyers, tried to redirect her flight through boston

	...At first, Trump's policy appeared to include permanent U.S. residents carrying green cards as dozens were subject to lengthy questioning by customs officials nationwide. The Department of Homeland Security on Saturday said the ban extended to legal U.S. residents. But Trump chief of staff Reince Priebus said Sunday that green card holders would be exempt from the order. As late as Monday afternoon, though, one green card carrier from Iraq was questioned for five hours.



so sat night DHS says it applies to lprs, then the preibus and Kelly statements


so why Haghighi not let in, but John Doe able to negotiate?

one guess: Sarvin Haghighi a spy, John Doe not? would want to make sure all the court cases out there would be ones they could control



http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:cocF5V8VoC4J:thesouthern.com/news/opinion/editorial/pitts/pitts-trump-s-travel-ban-is-a-national-embarrassment/article_1e499c8a-f090-59ea-843b-7948b6fcfc94.html+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us&client=firefox-b-1-ab

also mentions Nisrin Omer, detained after returning from Sudan


another john doe, resident, not allowed back, filed lawsuit:


http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-trump-travel-ban-chicago-lawsuit-met-20170131-story.html
	The suit marked the second legal action taken in Chicago's federal court since Monday over Trump's controversial order. On Monday, a Chicago man who traveled to his native Iran to care for his ailing mother asked a federal judge to declare the order unconstitutional.

	The plaintiff, who filed under the pseudonym John Doe, is an Iranian citizen and legal permanent resident of the U.S. who lives in Chicago with his wife and three children. According to the suit, the man was planning to return to Chicago early this month in time for the birth of his first grandchild, but when he tried to get a return flight Saturday, the ticketing agency "refused to issue a ticket for his travel to the United States due to the executive order."



http://www.promotionoftourism.org/?p=430
	First lawsuit in Chicago challenges Trump travel ban
	Posted January 30, 2017 by admin

	A Chicago man who traveled to his native Iran to care for his ailing mother is asking a federal judge to declare President Donald Trump’s executive order on immigration unconstitutional.

	The lawsuit, filed under the pseudonym John Doe, is the first challenge filed in federal court in Chicago to the Trump administration’s controversial travel ban. The suit seeks class-action status for anyone similarly affected by the executive order restricting travel to the U.S. from seven majority-Muslim countries, including Iran.

	A hearing asking for an emergency injunction barring the order from being enforced is expected to take place before U.S. District Judge Samuel Der-Yeghiayan this week.

	The plaintiff is an Iranian citizen and legal permanent resident of the U.S. who lives in Chicago with his wife and three children, according to the lawsuit. Earlier this month, he traveled to Iran to care for his ailing mother, who was alone there after his father died, the suit said.

	The man was planning to return to Chicago in early February in time for the birth of his first grandchild, according to the suit. But when he tried to purchase a ticket for his return flight on Saturday, the ticketing agency “refused to issue a ticket for his travel to the United States due to the executive order,” the suit said.

	The plaintiff’s lawyer, Taher Kameli, told the Tribune on Tuesday that his client is “anxious” to get home to see his family but afraid to try to re-enter the U.S. with reports of immigration agents detaining travelers for hours of questioning even if they have permanent residency or green cards.


not sure what happened to original chicago tribune article, maybe turned into the "two lawsuits" one


on Feb 1 says lawsuits got resolved:


http://chicago.cbslocal.com/2017/02/01/doctor-blocked-from-returning-to-chicago-sues-trump-over-travel-ban/


http://www.fox32chicago.com/news/2-federal-lawsuits-resolved-in-chicago-on-trump-travel-ban

Homsii don't think is a LPR, but news articles focus on him.

This john doe was a lawufl resident who left country to care for his sick mother, stranded by travel ban and could not return. An unwinnable court case if there ever was one.

John Doe's suit was filed Jan 30, apparently a few hours before Yates' decision. A few days later the gov resolves the case...


right, I'm an idiot. It's these same guys:

http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-trump-immigration-ban-court-met-20170201-story.html


so what happened is they file lawsuits before Yates fired (at least for John Doe, dunno about Homsi, maybe same day Feb 1?), then resolve quickly afterward.

can't find court docs for John Doe

timeline is:

around Jan 27-29: John Doe stranded

Jan 28: DHS says the ban applies to LPRs

Jan 29: confusion, Kelly says is dispotive, Preibus contradicting himself

Jan 30: John Doe suit filed

Jan 30, evening: Yates refuses to defend ban

Feb 1: McGahn says EO does not apply to LPRs

Feb 1: DOJ resolves John Doe's lawsuit


------


a bunch more court cases dunno why these were not in clearinghouse:


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/legal-actions-challenging-trumps-immigration-executive-order/story?id=45175192
	Two Christian brothers, Basam Asali and Hassan Asali, and their families say they were detained at Philadelphia International Airport on Saturday by Customs and Border Protection agents while trying to enter U.S. from Syria on lawful permanent resident visas (their brother Ghassan Asali is an American citizen). They claim they were given two options: Return to Syria immediately or go to jail, their lawyer, Joseph Hohenstein said. He added that they were not given interpreters, that there was no investigation into their case and that they were simply asked if they were from Syria. They were returned to Syria and are now in Damascus, he told ABC News. 


two LPRs detained and returned saturday

Christian, so harder to argue their hardship motivated by religious animus

lawsuit filed Jan 31


	... Unnamed John Doe, an Iranian citizen and a legal permanent resident of the U.S. who lives in Chicago with his family, claims he went to Iran earlier this month to be with his ailing mother and was planning on returning to the U.S. in early February. He wasn't, however, permitted to purchase a plane ticket for his return, he says. According to The Chicago Tribune, the judge assigned to the case, U.S. District Judge Samuel DerYeghiayan, is an Armenian, was born in Aleppo in Syria and was the first Armenian immigrant to become a federal judge in the U.S. 


the john doe stranded, filed I think before 2:30 on Jan 30


	... The American Immigration Council, the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project and the National Immigration Project of the National Lawyers Guild filed a nationwide class action in the District Court for the Western District of Washington on behalf of U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents who have filed visa petitions for their immediate family members who are nationals of the seven countries. The applicants have all gone through a long and rigorous application and screening process and are seeking to be reunited with their families in the U.S., the lawsuit claims. "Since issuance of the executive order, immigrants have been unjustly blocked from entering the United States at airports all across the country. Now federal government officials are blocking more family members before they even board their planes and suspending or revoking all other visa applications," according to the filing.

	"Plaintiffs include Reema Dahman, a lawful permanent resident of the United States, who had filed a petition to bring her 16-year-old son, stranded in war-torn Syria, to the United States. The two have not seen each other since 2012. They are at the last stage of processing, waiting only for an immigrant visa interview to be scheduled. But the executive order has suspended immigrant visa interviews, putting safety and security further out of the boy's reach and further delaying the boy's reunification with his mother," according to a press release from the plaintiffs.

	"Plaintiff Juweiya Ali's 6-year-old Somali son is also in limbo. Ms. Ali, a U.S. citizen, began the process to bring him to the United States from Somalia in August 2016. But they too now are left to worry that the visa process will remain suspended indefinitely," the press release says. 


EO splitting families, stranding kids of U.S. residents, filed Jan 30


------


where is petition for John Doe of Chicago?

https://foia.state.gov/searchapp/DOCUMENTS/9-FY2013/F-2011-07654/DOC_0C05262527/C05262527.pdf

his lawyer did some FOIA requests I 


http://abc7chicago.com/news/trump-fires-acting-ag-yates-after-she-defies-immigration-order/1727741/
	An Iranian permanent resident of the U.S., who used the name John Doe to protect his identity, also filed a lawsuit against the president for violation of the U.S. Constitution Monday in the Northern District of Illinois in Chicago. Doe's attorneys said the plaintiff is currently in Iran to care for his sick mother and is due to return in a few days, as his first grandchild is due in February.


filed Jan 30 northern district in Chicago

looks like this is it:


https://dockets.justia.com/docket/illinois/ilndce/1:2017cv00770/336067

Doe v. Trump et al Featured Case
Plaintiff: John Doe
Defendant: Donald J. Trump, Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, John Kelly and Kevin McAleenan
Case Number: 1:2017cv00770
Filed: January 30, 2017
Court: Illinois Northern District Court
Office: Chicago Office
County: Cook
Presiding Judge: Samuel Der-Yeghiayan 


this is initial filing on scribd:


https://www.scribd.com/document/338047748/Doe-v-Trump

and on archive.org:

https://ia601509.us.archive.org/12/items/338047748DoeVTrump/338047748-Doe-v-Trump.pdf

was class action, wanted "injuctive releif" for himself and "others similarly situated."

suing Trump, DHS, CB< Kelly, and McAleenan

pg 3-4

citing INA 1101(a)(13)(c) and Rosenberg v. Fleuti

lived in U.S. for 6 years, familiy all lawful permenant residents in Chicago

so it's a guy from Chicago


pg 7 (34)

	As of fililng this COmplaint the Executive Order remains in effect, even though in the last 48 hours Defendant Trump's administration has made contradicint statements about the application of the Executive Order towards lawful permanent residents.


(37) tried to get class certification for stranded LPRs


pg 8 explaining how it violates his due process rights

I guess saying violates 5th ammendment because the EO constained his right to liberty? I don't get it

if Iran quarantined due to virus, and Trump says all travel from there will be banned in two days, does that violate due process rights?


pg 9

goes over right to equal protection

(52) also points out the religios minority thing doesn't serve "national security" purpose and is discrimatory

wait no it doesn't

3(c) is the one barring "immigrants" https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-protecting-nation-foreign-terrorist-entry-united-states/

pg 10

arguing EO 3(c) "unconstitutionally" vague since "immigrant" may or may not be interpreted as a returning LPR, and cites confusion as evidence. Confusing to me since 3(c) bars "immigrants and nonimmigrants" from entry, maybe "nonimmigrant" has some legal meaning besides "not an immigrant"?

says violates 5th ammendment because the EO did not provide fair warning as to who counts as an "immigrant"

(57) Defendant Kelly and Defendant McAleenan appear to believe that Executive Order Section (3) subsection (c) applies to individuals who have been admitted to the United States as lawful permanent residents.

makes sense... Kelly referrs to 3(g) ("LPRs in 'national interest'"), which refers to 3(c):

	(g) Notwithstanding a suspension pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or pursuant to a Presidential proclamation described in subsection (e) of this section, the Secretaries of State and Homeland Security may, on a case-by-case basis, and when in the national interest, issue visas or other immigration benefits to nationals of countries for which visas and benefits are otherwise blocked.


so their argument is that since the EO is vague, those it applies to did not get proper notice and so their due process rights were violated. Cites plenty of evidence to support this.

pg 11:

saying due process violated a different way. I think it's: plaintiff promised he would only be considered seeking entry if he trigged one of six conditions in 1101(a)(13)(c), but Trump mandated that his rentry would be blocked without him triggering any of these, so the law as plaintiff would understood had applied to him (and intended by Congress) was violated. 

I guess this means to do it right Trump would have had to change 1101(a)13(c) first, or explicitly say it no longer applies

not sure



this petition different from others

seems more well thought out, no flowery ACLU "oh the humanity" kind of language

actually cites facts, interesting point like vagueness with plenty of evidence

well defined class in petition, and clear they got screwed over by EO

think this one was the showstopper, unwinnable case to land on Yates' desk Monday morning

got buried by media (merged with Dr. H case in Tribune which is interesting but J-1 visa and not as clear-cut by law) and by virtue of McGahn "clarifying" and WH negotiating case away after Yates fired.

Looks like this is first and only petition for stranded LPRs



------


https://www.appleseednetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Nixon-Peabody-%E2%80%93-Memo-on-LPRs-February-2017.pdf

http://archive.is/H5C3C

http://archive.is/OEkb8


------


https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/01/28/512158238/arrivals-to-u-s-blocked-and-detained-as-trumps-immigration-freeze-sets-in
	Green card holders — legal permanent residents of the U.S. — are also included in the ban, according to a senior Trump administration official. The official says they will need a case-by-case waiver in order to return to the U.S. if they are currently outside the country.


did they only ever say this anonymously?

this is on 28th


http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/866332/developing-judge-blocks-part-of-trump-travel-ban
	Under Trump’s order, it had appeared that an untold number of foreign-born U.S. residents now traveling outside the U.S. could be stuck overseas for at least 90 days even though they held permanent residency “green cards” or other visas. However, an official with the Department of Homeland Security said Saturday night that no green-card holders from the seven countries cited in Trump’s order had been prevented from entering the U.S.


should find where this was said



------


https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/landon_v._plasencia
	Much of the opinion focused on the right of the permanent resident alien to invoke the due process clause in her proceedings. Although an alien seeking initial admission to the United States has no constitutional rights, once an alien begins to develop the ties to the United States that go with permanent residence, her constitutional status changes. The Court implied that the a factual inquiry is necessary to determine if the privilege can be invoked, stating that “the constitutional sufficiency of procedures provided in any situation varies with the circumstances.” Should a permanent resident alien remain away from the U.S. for an extended period, she may lose her entitlement to due process in the assessment of her right to return. Additionally for consideration are factors such as the interests of the alien and the government’s interest in efficient administration of immigration laws at the border.


https://wolfsdorf.com/blog/rights-green-card-holders-ports-entry/
	An LPR who is deemed to be seeking admission may be charged as removable from the United States as an arriving alien.


so if you just got your green card and just arrived in the U.S., are you "seeking admission" or not?


https://www.appleseednetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Nixon-Peabody-%E2%80%93-Memo-on-LPRs-February-2017.pdf

pg 5

C.

immigrants don't really have any rights given from Supreme Court regarding being detained


D.

basically returning LPR has due process unless in list of exceptions in INA (like if a criminal)

	...A LPR seeking admission to the U.S., i.e., an "arriving alien," may be treated differently from a LPR who never left the United States, or a returning LPR not considered to be seeking admission. Mejia-Rodriquez v. Holder, 558 F.3d 46, 49 (1 st Cir. 2009); De Fuentes v. Gonzales, 462 F.3d 498, 503 (5 th Cir. 2006) (finding no constitutional right to admission, and no violation of equal protection where Congress classifies some LPRs as arriving aliens and not others); but see Matter of Pena, 26 I&N Dec. 613(2015) (where LPR allegedly obtained that status unlawfully, but not falling within any of the INA 101(a)(13)(C) exceptions, cannot be considered an arriving alien under INA 101(a)(13)(C)).





http://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-5th-circuit/1055062.html
	III.

	The first question is whether the BIA erred in upholding the immigration judge's determination that Petitioner was seeking admission to the United States as defined in 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(13)(C)(v).  The statute provides that “[a]n alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States shall not be regarded as seeking an admission into the United States for purposes of the immigration laws unless the alien ․ has committed an offense identified in section 1182(a)(2) of this title.”   There is no dispute as to whether Petitioner's crime is such an offense.   She argues she cannot be considered an “arriving alien” under the “Fleuti doctrine,” see Rosenberg v. Fleuti, 374 U.S. 449, 83 S.Ct. 1804, 10 L.Ed.2d 1000 (1963), and that considering her one raises constitutional concerns.   The government responds that the doctrine was superseded by the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA), and that Petitioner's case does not raise constitutional concerns.

	A. IIRIRA and Fleuti

	Before IIRIRA's passage, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(13) defined “entry” as:

	[A]ny coming of an alien into the United States, from a foreign port or place or from an outlying possession, whether voluntarily or otherwise, except that an alien having a lawful permanent residence in the United States shall not be regarded as making an entry into the United States for the purposes of the immigration laws if the alien proves to the satisfaction of the Attorney General that his departure to a foreign port or place or to an outlying possession was not intended or reasonably to be expected by him or his presence in a foreign port or place or in an outlying possession was not voluntary.



https://www.appleseednetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Nixon-Peabody-%E2%80%93-Memo-on-LPRs-February-2017.pdf


pg 7

says there's a difference between

- LPR with paperwork sqaured away travelling to U.S. but won't get green card until after admission

- LPR in U.S. without green card

- LPR in U.S. with green card




so what about those two families deported?

they each had green cards or "proof of green cards"

they traveled and landed in U.S., and so were present in U.S. with green card (but never "admitted" I guess, detained)

then got deported without any hearing or legal process at all


how does law apply to them?


	...In contrast, an "Initial" LPR is deemed to be seeking admission to the United States at a U.S. port of entry. 7 Because "Initial" LPRs have not been admitted to the United States at the time their applications for LPR status are approved—only granted the right to travel to the United States for purpose of obtaining LPR status—they have historically been deemed to be seeking admission as arriving aliens, and thus are subjected to greater scrutiny upon arrival. Unless and until these "Initial" LPRs are admitted to the United States, they do not enjoy the full rights and benefits of LPRs.


think this says they would be treated as "seeking admission"

footnote says:

	...After an Initial LPR's application is approved by a consular officer in the applicant's home country, an immigrant visa is issued by the State Department, which entitles the holder to travel to the United States as an immigrant. At the U.S. port of entry, the immigrant visa holder is inspected for entry as an arriving alien, and only becomes a permanent resident—and is processed for a permanent resident card—upon admission to the United States pursuant to the stamped 1-551 in his or her passport. A permanent resident card is mailed the LPR's U.S. address within a few weeks of admission.


------

Did the CBP actually ever explicity deny entry to a LPR?

DHS OIG summary says "bulk" of LPRs admitted, implying some weren't.

Not exactly, says:

	The bulk of the travelers affected by the EO who arrived in the United States, particularly LPRs, received national interest waivers. We found that the waiver process was largely pro-forma, and that none of the travelers received scrutiny greater upon referral to secondary inspection than they would have received in the absense of the EO.

CNN says airlines told to admit LPRs starting friday night and McAleen says airlines "sometimes overinterpreted our guidance." IATA says they are confused.

Doe's lawyer says he was refused a ticket saturday due to the executive order.

Aziz bros (had they entered U.S. before?), others signed away their LPR status.

Asali's had never been in U.S. before.

Almursi's (I think) signed away LPR status


------


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/what-to-know-about-trumps-immigration-executive-orders/
	CBS News’ Andres Triay reported Monday that at least 348 individuals were denied boarding by airlines over the weekend after the executive order was put into effect, according to two individuals who have seen the numbers. There were 394 encounters involving legal permanent residents at U.S. airports. Of those, 392 were admitted (two were denied: one Canadian dual citizen walked back across the Canadian border, and the other was arrested on an outstanding criminal charge).


media corabborates DHS statement: 2 LPRs detained at U.S. ports

says 348 denied boarding--how many of these returning residents?


------


this case was about letting stranded LPRs back in:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MI-0004-0005.pdf

pg 2

moved to stop EO applying to LPRs

defendents say "the EO does not apply to LPRs so it is moot" (this on Feb 7)

plantiffs say this is textbook voluntary cessation

(is it? initial position was to apply to LPRs on "case by case basis", then changed to "LPRs are dispositive" after some lawsuits so I guess so. But by what info publicly available can you argue the admin intended for LPRs to be denied boarding flights overseas? maybe the text of the EO is enough, but other statements conflicting)


pg 4


quoting DHS spokesperson saying order "will bar green card holders."

cites news reports on barring green card holders over weekend Jan 28 Jan 29

pg 7

says Kellys statement basically affirming order still applies to LPRs (also see interview senior official: "nothing has changed")


cites news report saying senior official (Miller?) tried to stop Kelly's statement on LPR waivers

are news reports "admissible" (if right word) for TROs? means news coverage important too... (and raises questions about power of our unelected media)


are they using weak cases on purpose?

argue that clear it applied to LPRs then their delcarations they add are a guy who was let in after an hour and a half


would be better to know why Samir was barred from his flight



https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MI-0004-0004.pdf


before this, gov just basically argued moot due to McGahn memo (I think that worked for Louhghalam? cites in doc)


------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/middleeast/iran-will-ban-us-citizens/index.html
	Clarification: An earlier version of this article suggested that Americans would be banned from entering Iran. The Foreign Ministry statement says Iran has not yet decided on specific actions, but that it would consider legal, political and retaliatory measures against President Trump's executive order.


in untangling how LPRs actually got stranded from ban, this isn't helping

most green card holders from 7 countries were form Iran

Iran gov client of KGB--trying to add to confusion?


http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/basketball/ct-us-basketball-players-travel-ban-20170130-story.html

U.S. citizens "stranded" in Dubai trying to get to Iran reported Jan 30

so whatever they did was by 30th


------


significance of signing away LPR status cases?


affidavits, lawyer say coerced

DHS faq says all voluntary


what about e.g. Asali?

media coverage makes it sound like they didn't want this to happen to him


but getting ahead of myself


CBP had policy of telling agents to give options sign away admission or face removal proceedings 

so this could help them this way: anyone "dumb" enough to sign away status might not be dumb at all, falling for it intentionally so that only spies they control can bring court cases

but not perfect, someone in Asali's position doesn't understand Enlgish very well

stories of detention, interrogation, and corecion also help toward this point of trying to make it so only spies are bringing suit

it would discourage travel from LPRs in general

then they would have fewer that they can't control slipping through the cracks


having policy of asking returning residents to sign away admission or face removal proceedings (maybe not policy, but easy to "misinterpret" this way) also creates more legal problems for ban

you are supposed to show up and they say "welcome home!" not "please go to secondary screening and here is form to sign away your admission"


assuming they have spies in CBP, customs, TSA officers, and people travelling back

so I think a general rule: the more chaos and confusion, they more they can get away with having their spies act without it being possible to make a strong case to trace back to the administration.

So a CBP officer or airline official can "misinterpret their guidance" in a way to bar a certain traveller from boarding a flight, and if that person a spy, be able to control that court case. 