https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0005.pdf

Ahmed Ali and Initkhab U.S. citizens

Ali manages Buy N Save in Los Banos, CA and makes $35,000 a year to support a family of five. Rent is $950 a month.

Initkhab goes to Yemen to care for ailing mother with older daughter

Daughter born in Yemen

Ahmed and Initkhab think daughter is U.S. citizen since they are both citizens.

Turns out they didn't know a technicality in law: Initkhab did not reside in U.S. for 5 years before giving birth to daughter, so she is not a citizen.

April 2011, Ahmed files files family-based immigrant visa petition for daughter with $420 filing fee. Approved June 2013.

But situation in Yemen deteriorating, civil war, increasingly dangerous. Because of this, and immigrant visa process taking so long (did they think this would speed it up?) Ahmed and Initkhab made difficult decision: in 2013, Initkhab and older daughter came back to U.S. and left younger daughter with grandparents


http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/03/politics/trump-immigration-ban-children-trnd/index.html
	In 2013 they made an agonizing choice.

	"I (had) to let my wife and oldest daughter (come) to (the) US and leave my little one with my dad and mom. I had no choice," Ali said. "I couldn't leave my whole family in Yemen."

	They thought Eman would join them soon, but it was almost four years before Ali got to make the trip to Djibouti to finalize her visa at the US Embassy there. 


Think daughter would join them soon, but four years until immigration process finished.

dec 2016 learn immigrant visa itnerview scheduled for Jan 22 2017

Ahmed arranged for daughter to go, uncle helped her travel by bus for 15 hours through dangerous part of Yemen, flew to Jordan, as Yemen consular services shut down.

Ahmed flew to Jordon to meet daughter. Flew with her to Dijibouti, had visa for 14 ays, but enough time to get required medical exam and visa interview.

They were notified visa interview was approved. Notified it was issued Jan 25, 2017, able to pick up Jan 26 2017. Trouble booking flight (no canada visa) but got one on Jan 28 to SFO.

However, after going through security and right before they would board, were told by airline officials that daughter was not permitted to board the fligth due to President Donald Trump's executive order issued on Jan 27.

Immediately called attorney, who sent letter to the U.S. embassy in Dijibouti reuqesting a waiver under E.O. lawyer spoke to consuler officer in Dijibouti on Jan 30, but was told embassy did hot have guidance yet on how the waivers to the executive action would be reviewed or issued.

Meanwhile, extending stay at a hotel in Dijibouti for $115 a night, recently found one for $80 a night. (this is on Feb 1 2017)

Took leave of absense from work to stay with daughter. Do not know when he will be able to come home or if he will be able to earn money for his family.

They don't know where else to go. Expensive to stay in Dijibouti, but doesn't want to leave daughter. Visas have expired, can't return to Yemen for long journey and civil war.  



...

as of Jan 30, Ahmed and his daughter had been especially screwed over by Trump admin

Another heartbreaking case Yates would have to argue is not that bad

2 hours before Yates decision:

http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2017/01/29/a_12_year_old_girl_is_stuck_in_djibouti_thanks_to_trump_s_executive_order.html
	Update, Jan. 30, 2017, at 2:15 p.m.: Rep. Jim Costa, a Democrat who represents California’s 16th congressional district, released the following statement about the Ali family:

    	Due to President Trump’s hasty decision making, a 12-year-old girl with parents who are U.S. citizens and Los Banos residents is banned from entering the United States. My office is doing everything within our jurisdiction to help Mr. Ali and his daughter to get home as soon as possible and safely.

    	As a member of Congress, my number one priority is Americans’ safety both at home and abroad, and I think it’s obvious that keeping a 12-year-old out of the country is not strengthening the safety of our nation.


later:

	...Update, Jan. 30, 2017, at 10:20 p.m.: Ahmed Ali and his daughter are named plaintiffs in a class action lawsuit challenging Donald Trump’s executive order. The Ali family’s attorney Katy Lewis says via email that the lawsuit, which was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington, argues that the executive order “violates the Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection under the law and statutory prohibition against discrimination.


join class action after Yates decision?



what happened after this?



http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Tearful-reunion-at-SFO-for-immigrant-family-10910347.php


got citizenship!

reported feb 11

	...Over the weekend, Eman and her father took advantage of a federal judge’s Friday ruling halting enforcement of Trump’s executive order and flew to the U.S. without any delay or problems from U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials.


went in after Wash v. Trump stopped EO


also has bit on green card holder barred from coming back

	...Soghra Nazari traveled to Iran a month ago to visit her ill mother. Then, Trump issued his order.

	“My wife called me and said, ‘I cannot come back,’” Mosen Nazari recalled.

	While he is a U.S. citizen, his wife only has a green card and is not eligible to become a citizen for three years. He moved to the United States when he was 24 and spent 22 years in Redding and Santa Barbara before returning to Iran 16 years ago. Five months ago, he and his family moved to Chico to provide his children with a better education.

	When his wife was barred from traveling back to California, he found himself contemplating once again returning to Iran.

	“I told my children we’ll go back there so they would not be separated from their mother,” he said.

	On Sunday, with Soghra Nazari by his side, he was exhausted by the anxiety and relieved. But not entirely.

	“We still don’t know what’s going to happen,” he said.



------


http://www.mercedsunstar.com/news/article130068964.html
	A federal judge’s order on an emergency motion is likely to bring home a Yemen-born Los Banos man who effectively has been stuck overseas with his 12-year-old daughter due to the travel ban issued by President Donald Trump last week.


	...The restraining order also prevents federal authorities from canceling validly obtained immigrant visas, demands them to return seized passports containing valid immigrant visas and directs them to inform all relevant airports, airlines and authorities at Los Angeles International Airport and the International Airport in Djibouti.



By Judge Andre Birotte

another TRO in CA?


http://fox40.com/2017/02/03/central-valley-father-daughter-to-return-home-from-yemen-following-block-on-trumps-travel-ban/

Feb 3 says Seattle judge got them back in



------


any traps here?

12 year old girl secretly terrorist mastermind?

Parents lying and it's all made up?

doesn't seem like it

hard for 12 year old girl to be spy

http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-los-bano-father-daughter-trump-travel-ban-20170131-story.html
	... California father, 12-year-old daughter stuck in Africa following Trump travel ban, lawyer says 

	...“He is understandably distressed and frustrated because everything is uncertain,” said his attorney, Katy Lewis. “We still don’t have a path to get them on a plane yet.”

	...Ali and his family moved to the U.S. from Yemen in 2004, but they returned to the country not long after because his wife’s mother was ill. While in Yemen, Eman was born.

	...“It’s just particularly upsetting that she can’t enter the U.S. and rejoin her family, who are U.S. citizens,” the lawyer said.


kindof spin to make it not look as bad as it does with other facts?

hmmmmm

"lawyer says"--really necessary? Missing parts on not wanted to go back to civil war, suprised about 5 year residency technicality in citizenship, father staying behind to support famil on 35K a year while mother in Yemen waiting 6 years for visa to go through

mostly on local news

did get on cnn, article seems accurate http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/03/politics/trump-immigration-ban-children-trnd/index.html



http://kmph.com/news/local/los-banos-man-and-daughter-stuck-near-yemen-because-of-travel-ban
	Costa says situations like this are being addressed through the Department of Homeland Security on a case by case basis. He's hoping to speed up the process so Ali and his daughter can come home soon.


Is that what Costa said? kindof different from what Ali said in sworn affidavit

this one seems better: http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation-world/national/article129818134.html



just wierd coverage


this article could be fed into breitbart and come out "foreign histpers steal U.S. jobs"

http://www.cnn.com/interactive/2017/01/politics/immigration-ban-stories/

but seems better to explain constitutional rights for citizens, residents, statues for refugees, and cases that actually explain why you need these and how ere violated by travel ban. Then public more informed.


...

https://muckrack.com/david-williams-3/articles


dunno what's up with David Williams


if psychopath would think this is funny:

http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/19/health/autism-school-destroyed-by-california-fire/index.html


a pun there maybe?

"Families fight for normalcy after wildfires destroy autism school?"

dunno

	...Whalen said Higuera "cried for a while" when she told him what happened to the school. He was concerned that the school's two service dogs were hurt, until the school's director sent pictures of the dogs to reassure him.

	"He doesn't really understand the situation," Whalen said. "I think he thinks he's on break from school right now and thinks he's going to go back."


kindof bittersweet

I guess author understands that?

or is sadist jerking off to this??

if wanted to jerk off to sadist porn, probably would have picked something less bittwersweeet and more tragic



------


was Ali's daughter's visa cancelled? would she have to do the whole 6-year process over again? (or would it be reinstated supposedly after 90 days?)


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0005.pdf

pg 9 says


	have ... one child with a valid immigrant visa, but who has been denied the ability to board a plane due to the January 27, 2017 executive order


best guess: under EO, he would have had to either

-take 90 day leave from job

or 

-leave daughter in Yemen, go over dangerous route again, come back to pick her up



dunno where they were initially

pg 11 says Sana'a


took 15 hour bus through "dangerous part" of Yemen to Aden.

Then flew to Jordan, then Dijibouti

this flight was on Jan 17 2017


so for bus journey go through these provinces:

Sana'a

Dhamar

Ibb or Al Bayda'

Ad Dali or Ta'izz

Lahij

Aden



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Yemeni_Civil_War_detailed_map

basically would be crossing line from Houthi to Hadi territory


------


bad shit going down in Yemen

http://www.foxnews.com/world/2017/01/28/amid-yemen-chaos-migrants-stream-in-only-to-face-torment.html

people getting tortured, body parts sold on black market

they kidnap people and torture them to extort money from family members



https://thewire.in/98933/yemen-children-hunger-crisis/

Children suffering, Cholera in Aden







http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/12/timeline-war-famine-failed-talks-yemen-171204155426740.html
	...UN talks collapse

	...August 7, 2016: UN-sponsored talks to establish peace in Yemen collapsed and fighting resumed once more between Houthi rebels and pro-government forces.

	...August 30, 2016: ISIL claims bombing at an army training camp in Yemen's port city of Aden that killed at least 70 people. The UN announced that the death toll from the war in Yemen has risen to more than 10,000 people.

	...October 29, 2016: Three weeks into a cholera outbreak in the war-torn country, the WHO said at least 1,410 cases were detected.

	...November 29, 2016: Houthi rebels formed a new government in Sanaa, flouting the UN-brokered peace process.





sounds like war got worse in months leading up to her escape


http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/12/yemen-level-civil-war-171204162917355.html
	Yemen: 'Now there will be a new level of civil war'

	4 Dec 2017

	The death of Yemen's former president Ali Abdullah Saleh raises doubts about the future of the war-torn country, as a Saudi-led coalition's fight against Houthi rebels will likely intensify, analysts say.


http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-38767874
	Yemen: Food crisis could become famine this year, UN warns

    27 January 2017

------



https://www.voanews.com/a/billions-sought-most-vulnerable-yemen-civil-war/3680757.html
	$2B in Aid Sought for Most Vulnerable in Yemen Civil War
	January 17, 2017 7:57 PM

	About $2 billion in urgent aid is needed this year to alleviate the suffering of the most vulnerable victims of Yemen's civil war, or about 10 million of the country's 27 million people, the resident U.N. humanitarian chief said Tuesday.

	..."I don't think this is enough, given that Yemen is a very critical emergency on the global stage," he said in an interview in Jordan.

	...On Monday, McGoldrick told reporters in Yemen that the civilian death toll of the war had reached 10,000. He said Tuesday that he thought even this estimate was low.


http://www.middleeasteye.net/news/i-do-not-want-be-sniper-how-yemen-shopkeeper-took-arms-1728544015
	Before war came to Yemen, 'Ahmed' was a shopkeeper. Now he's a sniper, armed with a Kalashnikov, earning $8 a day

	Wednesday 25 January 2017

	...Living in a snipers' zone

	The Houthis, who also have their own snipers, have laid siege to Taiz city with snipers and landmines, shooting anyone who tries to enter from the main roads.

	Snipers from both sides accompany fighters on the battlefield - but in Taiz, the conflict zones are in the city, which is full of resident civilians. Both sides say they only target enemy fighters - but civilians are often caught up in the conflict.

	...Mohammed's brother, Tallal, told MEE: "Mohammed wanted to get to the hospital as soon as possible to see his uncle. But he arrived himself, as a dead body, because of the odious snipers.

	“We have not left the city because of the danger of snipers - not because of clashes or missiles. Snipers are a hidden danger in the city.”


http://www.foxnews.com/world/2017/01/28/amid-yemen-chaos-migrants-stream-in-only-to-face-torment.html
	Published January 28, 2017

	ADEN, Yemen –  After reaching Yemen's shores in a packed migrant boat, the young Ethiopian coffee farmer was plunged into a living hell. The smugglers wanted thousands of dollars in ransom from the migrants, and they used him as an example of what would happen if they didn't pay.

	Each day for a month, they inflicted new tortures on him, Omar Farrag told The Associated Press. They put him in a tank of water and lit a fire underneath it. They wrapped his limbs with tight barbed wire. At times, they heated the barbed wire.

	Finally, his younger brother came from Ethiopia with $2,000 in ransom money. The smugglers decided they could squeeze more money out of him too, so they tortured his brother and ended up killing him, Farrag said.

	...The chaos caused by the civil war has raised migrants' hopes that they can slip through to Saudi Arabia, with no central authority keeping watch. However, the turmoil has also left migrants vulnerable to abuse and cruelty at the hands of the armed trafficking rings, many believed connected to and acting with protection from the multiple militias involved in the war.

	After taking migrants' money as payment to transport them, the traffickers often demand more, sometimes even phoning their families in Ethiopia so they can hear the torment their loved ones are subjected to. Rape is so widespread that women carry contraception for fear of becoming pregnant.

	...De Boeck, the IOM chief in Sanaa, said that trafficking in human organs is also on the rise.

	"The trafficking of people for organs ... seems to be more widespread, related to the fact that there is a collapse of the state and no capacity to have the rule of law applied," he said.

	Farrag, the coffee farmer, bears marks of torture at the hands of the smugglers. His arms are covered with burns and scars and he has a deep scar under one eye. One of his toes is missing.

	"Now, if I see a migrant with a scar, I can tell how he sustained it. I have tasted all sorts of torture," he said, looking around nervously as he spoke.

	He refused to be photographed or filmed, saying he didn't want his family to find out he was alive.


these guys probably on same bus rout? in through Aden and north, especially on return route. From Dijibouti to Aden north to Saudi Araba (and through Sana'a?)


https://civiliansinconflict.org/publications/research/civilian-perspectives-on-conflict-yemen/
	What remains constant across the territory is the inability for civilians to get any recourse from any of the armed actors. A 46-year-old man from Majzer, Mareb said, “We would meet with [the] party that caused us harm and they would apologize, but blame the other side for what happened. I don’t trust anyone. All sides are criminals and they have no conscience whatsoever.” When asked what civilians did to protect themselves during the conflict, many civilians said they left their homes. “We just ran from one neighborhood to another. It’s all we could do,” said a 43-year-old woman from Aden. In Sana’a, civilians said that they either moved to safer areas or stayed in ground floor away from windows, especially when they heard coalition fighter jets. “We could only flee from one place to another. There is no safe place,” said a 55-year-old man

	From the beginning of the conflict, Houthi-Saleh forces have engaged in shelling of civilian residential areas, medical facilities, schools, and other civilian infrastructure, causing many civilians in Taiz and Aden to flee. Civilians in both cities reported deliberate sniper attacks against civilians, accusing the Houthi-Saleh forces of engaging in this practice.

	On the other side, Saudi-led coalition strikes caused deaths, injuries, and the destruction of schools, medical facilities, and businesses in governorates in which CIVIC conducted research, echoing findings of other international and Yemeni organizations. According to the United Nations, the coalition is responsible for 60 percent of the civilian casualties since it intervened in March 2015. Civilians living in Sana’a, like their fellow citizens in Aden and Taiz, concluded that they were deliberately targeted.

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/19/world/middleeast/yemen-doctors-without-borders-hospitals.html
	Aug 18, 2016

	SANA, Yemen — Doctors Without Borders announced on Thursday that it would evacuate its staff from six hospitals in northern Yemen because it could not get assurances that its hospitals would not be bombed again.


https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/yemen/document/yemen-cholera-outbreak-situation-report-15-january-2017
	Yemen: Cholera Outbreak - Situation Report as of 15 January 2017

	* As of 11 January 2017, 15,658 suspected cholera cases have been reported in 156 districts.

	* A total of 180 out of 841 cases have tested positive for Vibrio Cholera, serotype Ogawa.

	* Overall, the epidemic curve shows a declining trend from week 51 onwards, while the attack rate remains high in some high risk districts.



-----


probably should get this right:

different standard for judicial review, tied to different kinds of due process violations


if plaintiff alleges "substantive due process" violation, e.g. state arbitrarily infringed on fundamental right, court does strict scrutiny and up to state to prove they didn't violate right


if alleges procedural due process violation, court does rational basis review with more burden on plaintiff


so this could be why Ali v. Trump court doc talks about "arbitrary government action" and not things like how bad gov procedures for appealing were. And gov lawyers spend a lot of time trying to argue strict scrutiny not appropriate and should be limited to rational basis review.


https://lawshelf.com/courseware/entry/substantive-due-process-fundamental-rights

has a nice flowchart


Does the statue deprive individuals of a fundamental right or interfere with free exercise thereof?

yes, right to live with family


Is the statute intended to achieve a compelling government purpose?

No, is Muslim ban


Is there any less restrictive means for achieving the purpose?

Yes, just have same visa process basically.


	...    “When a statutory classification significantly interferes with the exercise of a fundamental right, it cannot be upheld unless it is supported by sufficiently important state interests and is closely tailored to effectuate only those interests."



https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0006.pdf


I think they are saying since the order is discrimatory, strict scrutiny applies.

So I think it's like: there can't be a rational basis for the EO if its discriminatory.

So you can't say well maybe it has a compelling reason and start talking about if the processes provided are fair enough: it doesn't matter because more fundamentally, plaintiffs allege, the whole reason for the law is to be discriminatory and, so trying to see if the gov had compelling reasons balanced with due process protections, etc., doesn't make sense.