


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15614


filed Jan 31 and TRO completely stopped EO at least for CA on same day

plaintiffs were people in transit to U.S. when ban signed who were prevented from boarding flights, and their family members in U.S.


clearinghouse has no docket, no petition for this case



here's petition for Jan 30:


https://www.courthousenews.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/VISA-in-embassy-lawsuit.pdf


petition doesn't copy the same format as the other ones

says two groups of plantiff, 1 and 2. 1 filed I-130 for reletive to bring over 2 from Yemen.

So would cover Elan (but that was part of different case)

pg 5

"As late as two days ago the U.S. armed forces accidentally killed 10 women and children in Yemen."


Was that Trump's botched raid?

Trump doesn't look so good--helps make Yemen hellish, then cancels letting people their escape to see their U.S. citizen family members at the last minute.

says 1's spent a lot of time and money get family members out


names Boente as acting AG in petition -- so this is after Yates fired? yet dated Jan 30



pg 9


says they would become lawful permanet residents upon entering the U.S.

says LPRs have same rights as citizens besides voting


pg 10


has good quotes on Trump exhibiting "animus" toward Muslims

pg 11


goes on about Trump having a business relationship with other Muslim majority countries with terrorism problems not on the list

says terror threats from countries not named in EO that Trump has business ties with are greater than those in EO

says this is a violation of the emoluments clause?

idk kindof weird


pg 15

says action infringes upon liberty interests in family and property with regard to paying all that money for the visas

and says this is motivated by animus to Muslims and violates euqal protection

argues due process violations for both plaintiffs

maybe could work in supreme court, since would become LPRs upon entry


pg 18


says violated due process because done arbitrarily and without justification (for taking away pay for visa) and without notice or opportunity to appeal (for infirnging on family rights)


so they split it out substantive due process and procedural due process in count 1 v count 2


pg 19

points to sort of arbitrary countires selected for ban to argue it doesn't have justification

so argues arbitary infringment on rights


pg 21

argues doesn't apply to other citizens residing in U.S., so violation of equal protection


asks for complete stop to the EO

asks for them to instruct airlines to allow plaintiffs to board


why did gov lose?

TRO issued basically right away


what did judge find strongest?

I guess no info on that


but different from others, this one had a lot arguing that the ban had no national security justification, countries chosen arbitrary, plantiff 2's already vetted, not many terrorists from these countries, says "extreme vetting" in order already exists or has something close

showed pretty clear irreparable harm with lead plantiffs, unlike other cases

basically same situation as Elan with multiple people

argued both procedural and substantive due process allegations

had some convincing evidence in there that intended to be a muslim ban

and even if court doesn't buy it or unsure, still have procedural violations in there

argues initial LPRs have due process rights and could very well go to supreme court and win

refused to return defendants passports for some reason

some were non-citizens traveling with U.S. citizen children

refused to let them board plane to U.S. (don't think anyone deported?)


cited Trump brody interview




this is signed Jan 30--would Yates have known about this before her memo?


looks like no

or almost

filed against "DANA J. BOENTE, in her official capacity as Acting Attorney General of the United States"

interesting this one didn't get much media attention


also interesting: DHS OIG summary says Mohammad v. United States was a nation-wide TRO, while "civil rights" clearinghouse says they couldn't tell


why was wash v. Trump even necessary after this?

civil rights clearinghouse says this:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15614
	On Feb. 21, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint and a motion for class certification. That same day, the court held a status conference where it determined that the TRO issued on Jan. 31 would not be extended or converted into a preliminary injunction. The court found that, given the existence of the nationwide TRO issued in Washington v. Trump, the plaintiffs had not demonstrated that irreparable harm would occur in the event that this court's TRO were dissolved. Further, the plaintiffs' counsel were unable to identify any named plaintiffs with validly-issued immigrant visas who were currently being denied the ability to immigrate to the US.


so for whatever reason decided Wash v. Trump superceeded this


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0087-0001.pdf

order says they are "enjoined and restrained" from encorcing the EO for plaintiffs or "any other person" from the 7 countries

sounds nation-wide to me?


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0029-0005.pdf

wash v. Trump specifically says "this TRO is granted on a nationwide basis"