


cases that damaged national security by Trump logic:


darweesh--let in visa holders detained, gov did try to argue those on tourist visas had different intention and stay was too broad

boston--essentially ended EO for flight through Boston, travellers re-routing flights through boston


washington--full TRO on ban


maybe less so:

Doe v. Trump:

this one asked for admin to declare EO unconstitutional for LPRs and for couts to stop the EO from applying to them. Trump never said publicly at least that he wanted the ban to apply to returning residents, and eventually admin said it doesn't. Also said publicly that "people that live here" won't be affected during campaign (or befor sworn in)



Aziz v. Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0004.pdf

jan 30 petition

pg 15

says class is LPRs and those "traveling on valid U.S. immigrant visas who have been or will be either detained and/or coerced into signing a Form I-407"

petition asks for habeas corpus for petitioners, injuction not to detain class on basis of EO alone or deny admission to the U.S., invalidate I-407 forms


so if class is immigrant vizas and cannot detain, I guess this damages national security by Trump logic?

it's weird, since they made the case all about lawful residents detained at dulles, then add that "also immigrant visas" thing. Maybe ask for more to talk it down?



------



https://professional-troublemaker.com/2017/01/31/transcript-of-oral-arguments-in-muslim-ban-case-shows-department-of-justice-entirely-lost-on-how-to-defend-trump-fires-acting-attorney-general-today/
	If you want your executive agencies to work with you, they have to be kept in the loop.  Even then, however, it will be a hard sell for any attorney to walk into a courtroom with a straight face and say that the executive order by the guy who said he’d ban Muslims isn’t about banning Muslims, but just happens to be directed at 7 almost-all-Muslim countries.

	I don’t envy anyone in the U.S. Attorney’s office’s civil litigation division right now.  They’re not getting paid enough for this shit.



------


http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-deported-iranian-student-02012017-story.html

student visa holder deported to Vienna


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-immigration-ethiopia/nine-yemenis-deported-from-u-s-to-ethiopia-under-trump-travel-ban-idUSKBN15I1Z4

nine Yemenis deported to ethiopia


http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-iran-return-lax-20170201-story.html
	The American Civil Liberties Union and L.A.-based immigration attorney Stacy Tolchin stepped in, filing a habeas corpus petition Saturday that demanded Vayeghan’s release. Attorneys argued that Trump’s executive order violated Vayeghan’s due process and was hostile to a specific religion, Islam, putting it at odds with the 1st Amendment’s establishment clause.

	U.S. District Judge Dolly M. Gee granted an emergency temporary restraining order instructing that Vayeghan be allowed to enter the country, but it arrived too late. Vayeghan had already been put on a plane to Dubai in the United Arab Emirates on Saturday afternoon.

	According to his brother and attorneys who had sporadic phone contact with him, Vayeghan was pressured by officials to sign documents that revoked his immigrant visa. Regretting the decision afterward, he resisted demands that he board a plane for Dubai and was carried to his seat by authorities, an attorney for the ACLU said.

	Gee amended her order and instructed that U.S. officials were to facilitate Vayeghan’s return from Dubai and admit him to the country. Citing the “irreparable harm” Vayeghan would face if he was forced to go back to Iran, Gee ruled that his attorneys had showed a strong likelihood of successfully arguing that his denial to the U.S. violated federal law.

	Instead, officials in Dubai placed Vayeghan on a plane bound for Tehran.


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15593

this guy got deported and courts ordered him back

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0083-0002.pdf

doesn't say anything about facing persuection if sent back to Iran. But would have got a green card in a few weeks if let in.


http://www.cleveland19.com/story/34444969/cleveland-clinic-to-talk-about-doctor-affected-by-trump-travel-ban-at-1-pm

Dr. Suha Abushamma deported to Saudi Arabia due to ban

http://www.cleveland.com/metro/index.ssf/2017/02/sudanese_cleveland_clinic_resi.html
	Abushamma landed at John F. Kennedy International Airport on Jan. 28 after traveling to Saudi Arabia for a vacation. She was detained by immigration officials for hours before they put her on a plane back to the Middle East.

	...She said in a lawsuit that she was "misled and coerced" into signing forms withdrawing her work visa, which she obtained to work at the Clinic. She also said immigration officials loaded her onto a plane and that the plane took off after a New York judge halted the removal of those entering the country.

	Abushamma dropped her lawsuit on Tuesday. Jennifer Kroman, an attorney who worked on the case, said Abushamma received a visa waiver, which essentially reinstated it and allows her to enter and work in the United States.

deported in violation of court order but dropped suit later after she got visa back

https://www.pacermonitor.com/public/case/20459572/Abushamma_v_Trump_et_al

filed Jan 28

petition: https://www.wcpo.com/news/national/suha-abushamma-cleveland-clinic-doctor-sues-donald-trump-after-being-forced-to-leave-us

interesting, texting her lawyer that she believed she had no choice but to sign away visa. lawyer told her Darweesh case was in progress.

this doc filed jan 31, says Dr. Abushamma deported in violation of Darweesh order

pg 12-15 lists all the court orders violated by deporting her

pg 16 explains how her rights were violated


------


https://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/Assali-Family-Syria-Donald-Trump-Vote-Allentown-Immigration-Ban-Travel-Order-412238593.html
	Assali's two brothers, their wives and their two children initiated their immigration attempts in 2003 while living in Syria. In December 2016, they were approved to join Assali and her husband in Allentown after the couple bought and furnished a home for them.

	But early Saturday morning, after they landed at Philadelphia International Airport, Assali's relatives were detained. They were then sent on an 18-hour flight back overseas.

	...Assali's relatives, who are all Orthodox Christians, had visas and proof of green cards. The six Syrians were told they had to go back on the next flight and return to the Middle East, according to Assali. The next day, White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus announced that the order would not extend to green card holders.

	They went on an 18-hour flight back to Doha and are currently in Damascus, according to the Assali family. One of Assali's relatives has heart problems and was given oxygen.

	Tawfik Assali, the 21-year-old son of one of the deported Syrians, told NBC News he came to the United States three years ago and was waiting for his mother to join him.

	"I was one hour away from hugging her," he said. "Seeing her."


family of green card holders and religious minorities deported back to syria and prevented from seeing family of U.S. citizens residing in U.S.

happened right before court order, and court order didn't have provisions to bring them back


https://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/Suit-filed-vs-Trump-administration-over-family-denied-entry-412317833.html
	“They were treated like criminals. Their paperwork and their passports were taken away from them. They were not allowed to have them until they reached Beirut, Lebanon, where they had to travel by land back to Syria.”


deported to Lebanon or Syria?

	...After arriving at the Philadelphia International Airport, the Asali family was met by two U.S. Customs and Protection officials. The six were removed from the plane, detained and told they could either leave the U.S. on the same plane or stay and be arrested, according to court documents. They were denied phone calls and prevented from speaking to their relatives waiting at the airport.



https://whyy.org/articles/update-assali-family-reunited-with-syrian-relatives-at-jfk-after-trumps-order-deported-them/
	Before getting on a plane to the U.S. , the two Damascus craftsmen and their wives sold their cars and other possessions in Syria to afford the plane tickets. In Allentown, a new home fixed up by their Pennsylvania relatives awaited them.


sold cars and other things to get plane ticket, so would be in trouble after being deported back for that reason

	...And over the weekend, the family’s attorneys struck a deal with the government to make the demands a reality.


got deal with Trump admin


	...“My view of it is that the government attorneys recognized that the airport officers did not provide an individual assessment of the case, which is something that the executive order actually called on them to do,” Hohenstein said. “It was that recognition that led them to see that they had to be cooperative.


something off about this


https://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/Local-Family-Denied-Resolution-to-Return-From-Syria-412206853.html
	"There is a history of the U.S. government acknowledging mistakes and errors after they have removed people and assisted in their return,"  Hohenstein said. "When it hasn’t done its job right, they’re willing to fix it. That’s what we’re asking them to do here."


Seems like Assallis could have been lead plantiffs in Darweesh case, Aziz case, Ali case, others (at least for 5th ammendment violations), but Hohenstein wanted to aim low


https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2017/2/7/1631000/-Trump-Supporting-Christian-Family-Gets-Deported-Bailed-Out-by-Liberals
	Trump-Supporting Christian Family Gets Deported; Bailed Out by Liberals


ok they have to be doing this on purpose...


court doc petition:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0001.pdf

doc written poorly

pg 7

(31) says didn't go through with due process for asylum seekers

33 CBP already had return flights before they even got there

36 says risk of death or persecution in Syria


38 - 40 says explicity member of class in Darweesh case

I guess a better example for this class, since they actually got deported


due process violations kindof copied and pasted from Darweesh

count 2 is violation INA and CAt, due process

count 3 violation of due process right to apply for asylum

also argues EO unconstituional due to being a Muslim ban

I guess can still do that even if plantiffs not Muslim (were some of them Muslim?)


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0004.pdf


after petition and motion for TRO, gov let them in, and they requested 60 day stay on case to "explore potential settlement options"


...


https://www.mercurynews.com/2017/02/13/yemeni-refugee-family-arrives-in-east-bay-after-trump-travel-ban-nightmare/

Yemeni family with green cards detained, sent back to ethiopia and faced returning to war-torn Yemen.


	...Almurisi was a dentist and oral surgeon in Sana’a, the capital of Yemen, when the country plunged into civil war in 2015. For two years, he watched militants and government forces clash in the streets and airstrikes decimate the city’s buildings and its people. His childrens’ schools shut down.

	“It wasn’t safe to be there,” Almurisi said, using his cousin, Gawhar Fadhle of Richmond, as a translator. “Every day you hear a killing here, a killing there . . . some people, they get shot in front of you.”


	...They ended up in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. When they landed, Ethiopian Airlines demanded they pay $6,000 for the flight back from Washington to Ethiopia, according to Almurisi. The family didn’t have it — they’d spent their entire savings during the visa process — so the airline kept their passports, holding the family at the airport for four days. The airline finally let them leave after Wolozin notified reporters about the situation.

	Ethiopian Airlines did not respond to a request for comment.

	The family went to Djibouti, next door to Yemen, and stayed with friends for several days.


https://www.nbcbayarea.com/news/local/Yemeni-Family-Stranded-by-Travel-Ban-Makes-New-Home-in-El-Sobrante-413784673.html
	Now Almurisi, an oral surgeon, is making a new home in El Sobrante. He recounted the long and disturbing trek he and his family were subjected to trying to get there, which included spending eight days in an Ethiopian airport with five young children.

	Through an interpreter, Almurisi explained that back home in Yemen, he had a master's degree and practiced oral surgery. But as that country's civil war intensified, he decided it was time to get his family out.

	"I needed to protect me and my family," he said.

	He sold everything he owned, spent months getting a green card, then got on a flight to the U.S. with his wife and five children.

	When they got about four hours away from Washington, D.C., Trump's executive order was signed and went into effect. When their plane landed, the Almurisi family was ordered back on a plane and out of the country.

	"I was begging them to leave us here because of the war in Yemen," he said.


could have been asylum seeker but got green card instead, came as "initial LPRs"


	..."Knowing that the government is bigger and stronger than a president makes me feel safe, even safer, in America," he said.


http://www.fox5dc.com/news/travel-ban-lawsuit-020617
	The family filed a lawsuit in federal court challenging the ban. The lawsuit remains ongoing, but last week the government reached a settlement with the Aziz family, and another Yemeni family on the same flight, the Al Murisis, who were all turned away despite status as lawful permanent residents.


on same flight as Aziz bros. Got back Feb 5


https://www.mercurynews.com/2017/02/13/yemeni-refugee-family-arrives-in-east-bay-after-trump-travel-ban-nightmare/
	The Almurisis returned to the U.S. after a Seattle judge last week suspended the travel ban. But before returning to the U.S., they had to jump through another legal hoop: They became plaintiffs in a separate lawsuit that claimed they had been illegally detained at the airport, and ultimately reached a settlement with the federal government in that case that allowed them back into the country.

	Wolozin said that settlement was key because officials had already canceled their visas, and it appeared they had Almurisi sign a form withdrawing his family’s application for admission, she said.


sounds like part of Aziz case? this explains significance of being coreced into signing away visas/LPR status--at least according to lawyer, best or only way to get back is to settle.


...


https://www.oxfamamerica.org/explore/stories/the-other-side-of-trumps-travel-ban/


more people screwed over by travel ban

am I wrong or did Trump only provide quick relief for lead plantiffs in cases against him?

http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/08/us/somali-refugees-travel-ban/

family of refugees split


https://www.propublica.org/article/suspended-ban-iraqi-interpreter-american-dream-at-risk
	Haider’s immigration lawyer, an Iraqi-American named Farah Al-Khersam, had herself been detained at the border the day Trump signed the executive order. Even though she is a U.S. citizen and her husband has Canadian citizenship, they were held for hours at the U.S.-Canadian border. They were both eventually allowed to return to their home near Detroit, but Al-Khersam said she immediately called all her clients and told them not to travel.


U.S. citizen detained at canadian border due to EO?


	...It was only years after I first met him that I learned his real name, instead of the nickname used by the Marines to protect his identity. His family, which now includes two sons, still lives in Iraq and the danger is such that ProPublica isn’t using his full name.

	Haider told me while I was embedded that he accepted the risk of his work near Fallujah in the dangerous Anbar Province — hours from his relatively safe home — because he believed the Americans were trying to help.


article written by Russians?


	...Haider came to the U.S. on a Special Immigrant Visa designed to help those who worked for the U.S. mission in Iraq and Afghanistan escape potential retaliation and start over. He was one of the nearly 15,000 Iraqis and Afghans who were granted the special status through 2015, according to the Congressional Research Service.

	When Trump’s order first came out, there was immediate outrage from veterans and the Pentagon that Iraqi interpreters still trying to make their way to the U.S. were affected by the ban. In early February, Homeland Security said that Special Immigrant Visa holders could “apply for and receive a national interest exception to the pause upon arrival.” Officials did not respond to questions about how the exception worked at the border, what Iraqis had to do to apply for it, and how many have been granted or denied.


got SIV for service, military upset these were barred entry, Trump admin says they can get "national interest" waiver

so this guys story if read right: U.S. resident, one step away from being citizen, has business selling auto parts to Iraq but afraid to leave and do business there due to ban (won't be let back), so livelihood screwed over by ban. 



------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0001.pdf


on what merits likely to win?


https://www.lexisnexis.com/legalnewsroom/immigration/b/immigration-law-blog/archive/2017/07/13/class-action-lawsuit-challenges-practice-of-turning-away-asylum-seekers-at-u-s-southern-border.aspx?Redirected=true

gov denying asylum seekers for awhile apparently--not allowing to apply?


http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1418&context=ylpr
	As is demonstrated in the pages that follow, it is submitted that a principled analysis of current due process doctrines will compel the conclusion that all aliens on U.S. soil do indeed have a due process right to seek aslyum.


I mean they should

this guy revewing cases says they turn out that way

good enough I guess


------


https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/LPR%20Population%20Estimates%20January%202014.pdf

says 13.2 LPRs in US as of 2014


------


https://law.yale.edu/system/files/area/clinic/document/2017.01.28_emergency_motion_for_stay.pdf

in hearing for darweesh they don't even argue liklihonod of success

gov brings up tourist visas, court says "i'm going to stop you right there," 

	MS. WESTWATER:  Yes, your Honor.  It appears10the question seems to be what is irreparable harm.  As11we've argued, for people coming here on a tourist visa --12THE COURT:  But that's one category but this is13just an emergency stay and so I am interrupting you14because I'm not going to make the decision based on some15person that has not identified who might have a tourist16visa.


later

	...THE COURT:  No, no, no, no, not a word.  Not a4word.5The stay is granted.  I will sign it and I also6find, just so the record is clear, that each of these7four factors is met.  Irreparable harm has been8established.  There's no likelihood of injury to the9opposing party, nor is there any problem to the public10interest and the likelihood of success on the merits,11which we have not discussed, but I have reviewed the12submissions and for purposes of this application, there13is a likelihood of success on the merits.


so court says "liklihood of success on the merits" since judge reviewed petition

sounds unhappy to be there

merits for this one were deporting without CAT hearing, muslim ban

seems like they mostly did bad in court because judge pissed on gov didn't know what's going on


------

https://medium.com/@jakefuentes/the-immigration-ban-is-a-headfake-and-were-falling-for-it-b8910e78f0c5


haha


------


http://www.mwatana.org/en/12112017671


they're not going to wipe out the human race like this, but they're trying to get as many as they can... why?


maybe an experiment? get more data. Guys like warmflash interested in this, apparently think like this.



------


https://www.nbcnews.com/news/world/trump-travel-restrictions-leave-refugees-stranded-reports-n713591
	 The Trump administration also has yet to issue guidance to airports and airlines on how to implement the executive order."Nobody has any idea what is going on," a senior Homeland Security official told NBC News.

	In addition, the order applies to both refugees who are still "in transit" and U.S. green card holders from the affected Muslim-majority countries currently overseas, a senior administration official said. Those people would also need to apply for a waiver if they want to return to America, the official added.

	The official said it would have been "reckless and irresponsible" to issue guidelines before the executive order was signed because of security reasons. 


this true? aritlce Sat 28 4 PM

thought they had issued guidance before then? like call airlines



------

http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-pol-refugee-policy-20170128-story.html
	One of the few Republicans to speak out against the directive was Sen. Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who said the order could play into the hands of jihadist groups by being excessively sweeping in nature.

	“While not technically a Muslim ban, this order is too broad,” Sasse said in a statement


REpublicans probably psychologically unable to assess ban is a Muslim ban

that or is a spy


------


"constiutionall vague" or like arguments enough for a TRO?

enough chaos that really anything with likeliness to win good enough for a TRO

have no idea why Louhghalam v. Trump asks for TRO on whole ban while Doe justs asks for LPRs


I guess they don't have to rewrite law, separation of powers, etc.



------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html
	Friday night, DHS arrived at the legal interpretation that the executive order restrictions applying to seven countries -- Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Sudan and Yemen -- did not apply to people with lawful permanent residence, generally referred to as green card holders. 

	The White House overruled that guidance overnight, according to officials familiar with the rollout.


this referring to the exchange between Kevin and that other DHS guy?

Kevin was surprised they wanted to do LPRs case by case


------


https://lawandcrime.com/politics/trump-apparently-didnt-rely-on-legal-experts-in-drafting-refugee-ban/
	Reports from NBC and other outlets say that Donald Trump’s Friday executive order on immigration wasn’t vetted by his legal experts. At least, not the ones that presidents usually rely on.


    Trump WH shielded ban order from “formal review by NSC lawyers, or by any agency, including DoD”

    several sources tell @KenDilanianNBC

    — Ari Melber (@AriMelber) January 29, 2017

    senior DHS official tells @NBCNews that career professionals at State/DHS had no input on directives. now scrambling to interpret/implement

    — John Harwood (@JohnJHarwood) January 28, 2017

    senior Justice official tells @NBCNews that Dept had no input. not sure who in WH is writing/reviewing. standard NSC process not functioning

    — John Harwood (@JohnJHarwood) January 28, 2017

And here’s one more note from a Politico reporter.

    Minor example of weak vetting of Trump EOs: anti-terror one cites wrong provision of fed immigration law 8 USC 1222. Means 1202. Whatev!

    — Josh Gerstein (@joshgerstein) January 28, 2017




who was he supposed to show it to?

cited wrong part of law, also makes it seem rushed


------


https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/%27April%27%20of%20%27FOIA%20Logs%20-%20FY2017%20%26%202018%27.pdf


Someone named Beth Morrissey making specific FOIA requests about travel ban, but the request numbers can't be looked up on dhs.gov

actually can just copy to clipboard wrong

https://www.dhs.gov/foia-status

Request Number: 2017-HQFO-00550
Received Date: 04/06/2017
Request Status: Request for Docs Sent
Estimated Delivery Date: 03/01/2018
Closed Date: 


apparently it takes a year to look through 2 weeks of this one guy's emails

Joseph Maher was deputy general counsel at DHS, but became acting

Trump nominated John Marshall Mitnick as General counsel April 11


https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Feb%20logs%20Final.pdf

this guy Justin Sink doing same


maybe reporters or something


https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Feb%20logs%20Final.pdf

this one should be around somehwere:

2017-HQFO-00341 

guidance sent to Emirates and another airline

or request returned nothing...


------


https://web.archive.org/web/20180116045351/https://pastebin.com/Z0uwWFna

draft on pastebin


------

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LxKJ0FEoFqY

Kelly Kevin presser

12:30

McAlleenan says they were implementing operation procedures while court orders came through and had to adjust due to those court orders


23:31


McAlleenan saying LPRs not allowed to board until kelly statement?


24:37

Kelly says "my legal shopp, my representatives were involved" in development of EO.

26:46

people that know the immigration process "infinitely better than me" worked on EO, people around Kelly, including people in the interagency


------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/27/politics/administration-immigration-official-joining-doj/index.html
	Gene Hamilton, a senior counselor to the Homeland Security secretary since January and top immigration policy expert for the administration, confirmed the move to CNN.

	Hamilton's departure will be a blow to Homeland Security's policy shop, sources familiar with the situation said. The agency is tasked with managing the vast majority of the administration's immigration portfolio.

	...Justice also is charged with representing the government in litigation -- which would include all the sanctuary cities litigation, DACA lawsuits and ongoing travel ban litigation.


this guy involved in developing EO?


https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/trump-official-behind-the-end-of-daca-explains-himself
	Last week, I obtained a two-hundred-and-thirty-five-page transcript of a deposition that Hamilton was compelled to give, in late October, as part of a federal lawsuit over the Administration’s handling of DACA, the Obama-era program that protected from deportation some eight hundred thousand undocumented immigrants who had been brought to the U.S. as children. The lawsuit was brought by Make the Road New York, the National Immigration Law Center, and the Worker and Immigrant Rights Advocacy Clinic at Yale Law School. The groups’ argument is that, while the government may have been within its power to cancel DACA, the manner in which it did so—suddenly, and without warning—violated the rights of the people who relied on DACA for work permits, student loans, and other benefits. During the proceeding, Hamilton was pushed to describe the part he’d played in various Administration decisions. Over four hours, he detailed his interactions with senior officials such as Kelly and Miller, shared his personal views on immigration policy, and acknowledged, notably, that he’d been the author of the September 5th D.H.S. memo that formally terminated DACA. And, while Hamilton was careful not to answer more than he had to, the transcript offers a rare glimpse of an Administration official candidly discussing the development of a major area of policy.

	...In Sessions’s office, Hamilton met Stephen Miller, who was Sessions’s communications director at the time. In August, 2016, after Sessions had endorsed Donald Trump for President and Miller had begun writing speeches for the candidate, Hamilton volunteered to work for Trump’s transition team. When Trump won last November, Hamilton’s responsibilities increased. “I was generally the lead on development of all immigration-policy issues for the transition entity, and so everyone who worked on that reported to me,” he said. He oversaw a team of roughly a dozen people, and one of his jobs was to recommend appointees for agencies including D.H.S., ICE, and the Justice Department.


sounds like it


http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/17/politics/jeff-sessions-team-takes-over-washington/index.html
	Already, a network of former Sessions staffers and like-minded allies have made an impact on the administration. When Trump rolled out his controversial travel ban, it caught Congress and many of the agencies that would implement it by surprise. The administration maintains that it worked with the Department of Homeland Security on the order. But according to sources familiar, the coordination largely amounted to two former Sessions staffers -- Stephen Miller in the White House and Gene Hamilton at DHS -- working together mostly without the knowledge of other rank and file and leadership at DHS.


CNN says it was largely Miller and Hamilton working on EO

	...Other members of the Sessions coalition that are now in key administration posts include Julie Kirchner, a former executive director of FAIR who is now working in a top role at Customs and Border Protection; Kathy Nuebel-Kovarik, a former staffer for Grassley now directing policy at US Citizenship and Immigration Services; and Dimple Shah, a former House Judiciary Committee staffer under Goodlatte, most recently of House Oversight, now working on immigration policy at DHS.


also worked on EO? 

	...Hill sources readily leaked stories about how members of Goodlatte's current staff on Judiciary helped write the controversial travel ban executive order through their work on the transition, the details of which were unknown to Goodlatte himself, which drew concern on the Hill as even Republicans criticized the lack of consultation in advance from the Trump White House. 


apparently some former Goodlatte staffers worked on it


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/31/politics/stephen-miller-immigration-trump-administration/


CNN says Miller and Bannon overruled DHS interpretation of LPRs, although emails make it look like that was Hamliton


------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/homeland-security-chief-and-white-house-clash-1485823301
	Mr. Kelly was also frustrated at not knowing the details of the travel ban earlier, so he could prepare his agency to respond, according to people familiar with the matter. Mr. Trump signed the executive order that created the ban late Friday afternoon. Mr. Kelly was only informed of the details that day as he was traveling to Washington, even though he had pressed the White House for days to share with him the final language, the people said.


Kelly was shown drafts, but according to this wasn't shown final language and wanted to see it

makes sense since he had to implement it


	...On Monday night, the Trump administration removed Daniel Ragsdale as acting head of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, an agency within DHS. Mr. Ragsdale had come to be viewed in the building as a supporter of the Obama administration’s immigration policies, and the move had been expected well before the furor over Friday’s executive order on immigration. 


any significance to this?

	Mr. Trump named Thomas Homan, a senior ICE official, as the acting director of the agency.


so that's how he got in

	
	...Mr. Kobach is a favorite of some in the White House and is well-regarded by groups favoring a crackdown on immigration. In November, he presented Mr. Trump with a plan to institute “extreme vetting” of people entering the U.S.

	That plan included posing “extreme vetting questions” to people considered “high risk” who were entering the country. The proposed questions included queries about their support for “Sharia law, jihad, equality of men and women, [and] the United States Constitution," according to a copy of paperwork Mr. Kobach was photographed holding as he exited from a meeting with Mr. Trump.


Kobach presenting extreme Muslim vetting to Trump in November


------


http://ktla.com/2017/01/28/inside-trumps-executive-order-and-travel-ban/
	When President Donald Trump declared at the Pentagon Friday he was enacting strict new measures to prevent domestic terror attacks, there were few within his government who knew exactly what he meant.

	Administration officials weren’t immediately sure which countries’ citizens would be barred from entering the United States. The Department of Homeland Security was left making a legal analysis on the order after Trump signed it. A Border Patrol agent, confronted with arriving refugees, referred questions only to the President himself, according to court filings.

	Saturday night, a federal judge granted an emergency stay for citizens of the affected countries who had already arrived in the US and those who are in transit and hold valid visas, ruling they can legally enter the US.

	Trump’s unilateral moves, which have drawn the ire of human rights groups and prompted protests at US airports, reflect the President’s desire to quickly make good on his campaign promises. But they also encapsulate the pitfalls of an administration largely operated by officials with scant federal experience.

	It wasn’t until Friday — the day Trump signed the order banning travel from seven Muslim-majority countries for 90 days and suspending all refugee admission for 120 days — that career homeland security staff were allowed to see the final details of the order, a person familiar with the matter said.

	The result was widespread confusion across the country on Saturday as airports struggled to adjust to the new directives. In New York, two Iraqi nationals sued the federal government after they were detained at John F. Kennedy International Airport, and 10 others were detained as well.

	In Philadelphia, a Syrian family of six who had a visa through a family connection in the US was placed on a return flight to Doha, Qatar, and Department of Homeland Security officials said others who were in the air would be detained upon arrival and put back on a plane to their home country.

	Asked during a photo opportunity in the Oval Office Saturday afternoon about the rollout, Trump said his government was “totally prepared.”

	“It’s working out very nicely,” Trump told reporters. “You see it at the airports. You see it all over. It’s working out very nicely and we’re going to have a very, very strict ban, and we’re going to have extreme vetting, which we should have had in this country for many years.”

	The policy team at the White House developed the executive order on refugees and visas, and largely avoided the traditional interagency process that would have allowed the Justice Department and homeland security agencies to provide operational guidance, according to numerous officials who spoke to CNN on Saturday.


	...Before the President issued the order, the White House did not seek the legal guidance of the Office of Legal Counsel, the Justice Department office that interprets the law for the executive branch. A source said the executive order did not follow the standard agency review process that’s typically overseen by the National Security Council, though the source couldn’t specifically say if that included the decision to not have the order go through the Office of Legal Counsel.


this turned out false... why was this in there?

it's sort of one-sided

did seek out legal counsel from OLC

did show to some at DHS, just not enough