

wash v. trump decision not to grant gov stay

pg 23


	The Government argues that, even if the States have shown that they will likely succeed on some of their procedural due process claims, the district court nevertheless erred by issuing an “overbroad” TRO. Specifically, the Government argues that the TRO is overbroad in two independent respects: (1) the TRO extends beyond lawful permanent residents, and covers aliens who cannot assert cognizable liberty interests in connection with travelling into and out of the United States, and (2) the TRO applies nationwide, and enjoins application of the Executive Order outside Washington and Minnesota. We decline to modify the scope of the TRO in either respect.

	First, we decline to limit the scope of the TRO to lawful permanent residents and the additional category more recently suggested by the Government, in its reply memorandum, “previously admitted aliens who are temporarily abroad now or who wish to travel and return to the United States in the future.”


gov says wash TRO too broad covers "aliens who cannot assert cognizable liberty interests in connecting with travelling into and out of the United States"

so I guess wanted to limit to aliens who could

suggested not just LPRs, but "perviously admitted aliens who are temporarily abroad now or who wish to travel and return to the United States in the future."

so covers I think student, medical residence, work visas which I think also have protections for temporary leaving U.S. (dunno case history)

	That limitation on its face omits aliens who are in the United States unlawfully, and those individuals have due process rights as well. Zadvydas, 533 U.S. at 693. That would also omit claims by citizens who have an interest in specific non-citizens’ ability to travel to the United States. See Din, 135 S. Ct. at 2139 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment); id. at 2142 (Breyer, J., dissenting) (six Justices declining to adopt a rule that would categorically bar U.S. citizens from asserting cognizable liberty interests in the receipt of visas by alien spouses). There might be persons covered by the TRO who do not have viable due process claims, but the Government’s proposed revision leaves out at least some who do.


Wash says proposal no good because omits illegal aliens and citizens with interest in specific other's ability to travel

but I don't get this

this is 9th circuit court

supreme court said in Kerry v. Din that there is no liberty interest in other non-citizen right to travel.

trying to argue illegal immigrants have right to re-entry sounds iffy (they didn't have right to entry in the first place...)

something wrong with 9th circuit?

best arg by them I guess is "we don't have to rewrite EO." Basically: you fix it (which is what they did)



...


takeaway is gov knew by then they screwed up on re-entry of LPRs and certain other visas, restricting travel for U.S. residents

as far as I can tell everything else up in the air, 9th circuit blowing smoke out their ass


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0003.pdf

pg 8

	31.Congress has provided that lawful permanent residents in Petitioners’ situation are entitled to enter the United States. Under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(13)(C), a lawful permanent resident is regarded as seeking an admission into the United States for purposes of the immigration laws” only if he or she “has abandoned or relinquished that status,” id. § 1101(a)(13)(C)(i), has been absent from the United States for more than 180 days continuously, 8is in removal proceedings, has committed one of a class of enumerated offenses, or has attempted to enter without inspection.

	32.None of the foregoing circumstances applies to Petitioners and therefore they are not deemed to be seeking admission and have a right to enter.In re Collado–Munoz,21I. &N.Dec.1061,1065-1066(1998)(en banc) (requiring immigration judge to look to 8 U.S.C.§ 1101(a)(13)(C) in determining whether lawful permanent resident was applicant for admission); Vartelas v. Holder, 566 U.S. 257, 132 S. Ct. 1479, 1484, 182 L. Ed. 2d 473 (2012) (citing In re Collado-Munozand recognizing that the definition supersedes previous statute’s definition of entry). 


argues that Aziz brothers wouldn't be considered seeking admission.

Would this hold up in court?


doc "memorandium of law in opposition to the Commonwealth's motion to intervene" (02/02/17) says no:

	Defendants hereby respond in opposition to the motion to intervene in the instant proceedings filed by the Commonwealth of Virginia (“the Commonwealth”). The Commonwealth seeks to intervene as a Petitioner on the same side of this litigation as Petitioners Tareq Aquel Mohammed Aziz and Ammar Aqel Mohammed Aziz, two Yemeni nationals who, according to their Amended Habeas Petition and Complaint, had been issued immediate relative visas, were seeking admission into the United States, and were detained at Washington-Dulles International Airport on January 28, 2017 and not admitted to the United States in conformance with the Executive Order of January 27, 2017


thing is they signed away their LPR status anyway



https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0016.pdf
	...The reason that CBP agents compelled Tareq and Ammar to sign I-407 documents, is that, becausethe brothers were not subject to expedited removal, nor inadmissible, there was no other  legal  mechanism tobar  Tareq  and  Ammar  from  entering  the  United  States  and  becoming lawful  permanent  residents  thereof. See  generally8  U.S.C.  §  1225(b).  Yet,  they  were  under specific orders from respondents to bar admission of individuals in Tareq and Ammar’s situation. 


ammended petition says they were seeking admission

maybe lawyers didn't know they signed away their LPR status until later?


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-PA-0014-0001.pdf

did Asali's sign away LPR status? would the argument that they weren't seeking admission work for them?

https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/11pdf/10-1211.pdf

don't understand but Nixon-Peabody doc seems pretty clear that if they had never entered the U.S. before they are seeking "admission," even if granted everything else for LPR status otherwise. They are not considered LPR until they are actually legally admitted to the U.S.