
http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1418&context=ylpr

found aliens on u.s. soil do have due process rights for removal

courts generally say everyone in u.s. has rights, but said gov has right to control entry to country as they choose "largely removed judicial intervention from the gateways of entry tothis country."

a controversy since early 20th century over illegal immigrants having right to due process while those trying to enter lawfully did not

	...In addition to fostering unfairness, the deportable/excludable analysis also spawned other analytic contradictions. Because the legal determinant was based on the fact of physical entry into the United States, cases sought a ra- tionalization for the status of aliens who remained present within our borders in detention or other forms of custody following interception by immigration authorities. As a result, the Court developed the so-called "entry fiction," a doctrine treating as "excludables" those aliens who were within government custody on U.S. lands following interception at the border as if they had never entered the country.


"entry fiction" says those on U.S. soil but detained count the same as someone detained oustide U.S. soil, and so could be deported without due process

talks about McCarthery-era decision where spouse of U.S. citizen could be excluded based on secret information


	...Accordingly, while Nineteenth Century doctrine continued to govern theimmigrant's right to enter our country, due process reached those who hadphysically arrived. Resident aliens received most of the constitutional safe-guards enjoyed by U.S. citizens. Even for illegally entering aliens, their statusas "deportables" activated procedural due process that included the right to afair hearing. Like other facets of immigration, though, the result of preferringillegal secret entrants to law-abiding asylum seekers was a policy of contra-dictory legal tenets and logistical inefficacy. Honest refugees were being dra-matically penalized; illegal entry was effectively encouraged; border crossingswere not substantially reduced and, if anything, more covert entries were as-sured.


still had problem where it ended up those trying to enter lawfully got penalized without constitution protections while those entering legally would get due process hearings before being deported.

pg 11

after WWII, UN, world recognized right of refugees to seek asylum

Refugee act of 1980 "brought U.S. refugee law into conformance with the 1967 UN protocol relating to the status of refugees"


enacted "right to seek aslyum" established first provision in federal law "specifically relating to requests for asylum"

applied to "any alien physically present in United States," ignore "entry fiction"

	Any alien who is physically present in the United States or who arrives in the United States (whether or not at a designated port of arrival and including an alien who is brought to the United States after having been interdicted in international or United States waters), irrespective of such alien's status, may apply for asylum in accordance with this section, or where applicable, section 1225(b) of this title. 


as of 2001, "The Supreme Court has yet to address the consitutional impact of the Refugee Act of 1980." 

	
	... broad statement from a 1982 court decision addressing re- entry issues continues to influence several courts concerning asylum. In Landon v. Plasencia, the Court described the right of aliens to seek initial admis- sion as a "privilege." 63 That mention represents dictum because the Court found that the alien facing deportation in that case did indeed have constitu- tional rights. 64 Holding that the alien continued to be a permanent resident after a trip abroad, she therefore retained her due process rights to a fair hearing when threatened with deportation. Therefore, the Court had no occasion to dis- cuss, much less determine, whether the newly enacted Refugee Act of 1980 created a right to seek asylum with due process implications. Even so, later cir- cuit court decisions would cite the Landon reference to "privilege" without ac- knowledging its limited force as a dictum or discussing the fact that it arose in a pre-Refugee Act setting.


court said seeking initial admission a "privelege," case had to due with permanent resident returning from trip abroad. Found she did have constitutional rights when facing deportation.

Didn't get to question of right to seek asylum with due process.


https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/landon_v._plasencia
	Much of the opinion focused on the right of the permanent resident alien to invoke the due process clause in her proceedings. Although an alien seeking initial admission to the United States has no constitutional rights, once an alien begins to develop the ties to the United States that go with permanent residence, her constitutional status changes. The Court implied that the a factual inquiry is necessary to determine if the privilege can be invoked, stating that “the constitutional sufficiency of procedures provided in any situation varies with the circumstances.” 


weird

do they have due process rights for this "factual inquiry?" I don't get it


http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1418&context=ylpr

pg 15

	...the Court concluded that aliens had been granted a right to submit and substantiate their claim for asylum. 75 Based on the creation of that substantive entitlement, the court applied the due process doctrine of Supreme Court cases like Morris- sey v. Brewer 76 and found that the Constitution safeguarded the right to seek asylum. Because federal law established a right to petition for asylum, this en- titlement gave rise to a protectible liberty interest, 77 even if the decision to grant asylum was discretionary.

	Therefore, while finding no constitutional right concerning the granting of asylum itself, the court found that due process was invoked by the right to seek this remedy. "Although fragile, the right to petition is nevertheless a valuable one to its possessor. ' , 79 Because the right to apply for asylum stood upon a foundation of procedural due process, the court found that "some form of hearing" was required, and that the hearing must be conducted "at a meaning- ful time and in a meaningful manner." 80 Applying the three-part test of Mathews v. Eldridge, 81 the court, upon weighing the private interest at stake, the likelihood of error and the government's interest, found that the Haitian deportation program violated due process.


court finds due process protects right to seek asylum

	...Two years later, the Second Circuit expressly invoked the Refugee Act of 1980 in Augustin v. Sava 85 to hold that the absence of adequate translation of asylum proceedings violated the procedural due process rights of a Haitian refugee. Applying analysis that paralleled Haitian Refugee Center v. Smith, the court, like the Fifth Circuit, found no inherent constitutional rights in the asy- lum process, but reasoned that aliens "do have such statutory rights as Con- gress grants." 86 Because the Refugee Act of 1980 conferred upon aliens a sub- stantive entitlement to seek asylum, the court ruled that, while a grant of asylum is discretionary, the right to apply for asylum and receive a fair hearing required adequate procedural safeguards.


I think this is saying it's not explicity in the constitution but it comes from the statute


	...Citing the declaration in Landon v. Plasencia 95 that an alien seeking admission invokes merely a "privilege," the Court not only rejected the theory of Miranda-type notifica- tion, it issued a broader opposition to due process for excludable aliens: "Ali- ens seeking admission to the United States therefore have no constitutional rights with regard to their applications and must be content to accept whatever statutory rights and privileges are granted by Congress." 96 While noting that the government granted significant benefits to aliens, including the right to an asylum hearing, the court omitted any mention of the Supreme Court doctrine that imbued such entitlements with due process. From its premise of rejecting a constitutional duty to notify aliens of their asylum rights, the Court proceeded to disavow the constitutional ruling of Haitian Refugee Center v. Smith that had applied due process simply to assure fair hearings. 97 Even so, the Eleventh Circuit sustained certain of the alien's claims on non-constitutional grounds due to alleged failures to comply with the INS's own regulatory criteria con- cerning parole and detention.


another circuit says aliens have right to seek asylum due to statutes, but rejected that constitution protects this with due process

"subsequent Eleventh CIrcuit cases would instead firmly entrench the view that due process does not reach aliens seeking refuge in this country."

pg 19

Jean v. Nelson got to supreme court, but they declined to reach 5th ammendment issue. Justice Marshall and Jusitce Brennan disagreed with this, and wrote that "excludable aliens clearly enjoy Fifth Amendment protection" in criminal prosecution, other matters

as of 2000 this is last time someone in supreme court ever wrote in this issue.

pg 21

circuit courts still split on this issue

pg 23 case in 4th circuit "validation of the constitutional right of any alien on U.S. soil to seek asylum."


	...The principal substantive features of IIRIRA became effective on April 1, 1997,134 and thus post-dated the factual circumstances giving rise to the divergent decisions among the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Eleventh, and D.C. Circuits, and, potentially, the First Circuit. 


I guess author argues IIRIRA resolves disagreement among circuits?


pg 24

11th circuit dispatches due process for asylum seeking claim of refugee after IIRIRA


------


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-court-asylum/u-s-top-court-leaves-intact-ruling-against-central-america-asylum-seekers-idUSKBN17J11W
	April 17, 2017

	The U.S. Supreme Court sidestepped a turbulent debate over illegal immigration on Monday, turning away an appeal by a group of asylum-seeking Central American women and their children who aimed to clarify the constitutional rights of people who the government has prioritized for deportation.

	...The women challenged in federal court the rejection of their asylum claims, alleging a violation of their right to due process under the U.S. Constitution.

	In August, the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia said they may be treated the same way as non-citizens seeking initial admission to the United States, who do not have any constitutional rights of review if denied entry.

	The women appealed to the Supreme Court. 


https://www.humanrightsfirst.org/press-release/supreme-court-upholds-flawed-ruling-against-asylum-seekers
	New York City — Human Rights First today expressed serious concern that the Supreme Court declined to hear the case of Castro v. U.S. Department of Homeland Security, leaving in place the Third Circuit’s ruling that denies 28 asylum seekers detained in Berks County, Pennsylvania the ability to challenge in federal court “expedited removal orders” issued by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). 


so they left the split between circuit courts


something wrong with the supreme court?

you'd think they'd want to resolve this, esepcially after 2014 immigration crisis, 2016 immigration crisis, Trump...


------


https://whyy.org/articles/update-assali-family-reunited-with-syrian-relatives-at-jfk-after-trumps-order-deported-them/
	Government officials are planning to bring the six into the country with a special waiver (I-193 visa waiver) recognizing that the original visa revocation was unlawful, providing the family permanent residency.


the Asali's vis revocation was unlawful? why?


------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/us/syrian-family-trump-travel-ban/index.html
	The Assalis, US citizens who live in Allentown, Pennsylvania, weren't able to make contact with their family members until they were already headed back overseas. One of the brothers told Sarmad Assali they were not allowed to make calls or use the Internet while they were held.


due process violation? if true, can't get a lawyer.