
https://www.voanews.com/a/us-supreme-court-hands-down-two-decisions-on-immigration/2830500.html
	The first case, Kerry v. Din, discusses the rights of Kanishka Berashk, the spouse of Fauzia Din, to be able to immigrate to the U.S. to join Din, who is a U.S. citizen.

	After the U.S. State Department denied Berashk’s visa application, citing a broad terrorism-related statute because he used to work in the Taliban-controlled government, he sued Secretary of State John Kerry and tried to get the high court to review that denial.

	No right

	The Supreme Court held that because Berashk is not a U.S. citizen, he did not have the right to get a court review, and his U.S. citizen wife also did not have a due-process right to get the visa denial challenged in a federal court.


so if U.S. citizen's spouse visa denied, and spouse not a u.s. citizen, no right for citizen to challenge in court


	...Steven Yale-Loehr, a law professor at Cornell University, said the Supreme Court’s decision on this case has a much broader impact on immigration to the U.S.

	“If a U.S. citizen marries a Chinese citizen in China and tries to petition through the green-card process to have the foreign spouse come over to the United States, and if the U.S. (consulate) in Guangzhou were to deny the visa because the foreign spouse is a former member of the Communist Party, or they allege maybe the Chinese citizen committed some crimes in the past even though it is unproven, that would not be reviewable in the U.S. court,” Yale-Loehr said.



------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0001.pdf

pg 19

	119. Plaintiffs repeat and incorporate by reference each and every allegation contained in the preceding paragraphs as if fully set forth herein 



	120. The Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that “[n]o person shall ... be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” 



	121. Plaintiffs Juweiya Ali, Reema Dahman, and Ahmed Ali have a constitutionally protected li berty interest i n their family life. 



	122. At a minimum, due process protects individuals against arbitrary government action, including actions that do not adhere to the constraints that Congress has imposed or the facts may dictate. 



	123. Defendants’ actions in suspending the pr ocessing of their immigrant visas and in denying the validity of existing immigrant visas, taken pursuant to the EO, violate the procedural due process rights guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment. 


I don't get it

due they have right or not?

maybe lawyer put this in anyway even though sounds like Kerry v. Din says he would lose on this



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerry_v._Din
	Writing for a plurality of the court,[fn 1] Justice Antonin Scalia wrote that there is no constitutional right to live with one’s spouse, and because Din was not denied “life, liberty, or property,” she was not entitled to due process.


I guess living with your spouse (kid?) isn't a "liberty interest," so not protected by due process


wash v Trump cites Kerry v. Din this way:

	Even if the claims based on the due process rights of lawful permanent residents were no longer part of this case, the States would continue to have potential claims regarding possible due process rights of other persons who are in the United States, even if unlawfully, see Zadvydas, 533 U.S. 693; non-immigrant visaholders who have been in the United States but temporarily departed or wish to temporarily depart, see Landon, 459 U.S. 33-34; refugees, see 8 U.S.C. § 1231 note 8; and applicants who have a relationship with a U.S. resident or an institution that might have rights of its own to assert, see Kerry v. Din, 135 S. Ct. 2128, 2139 (2015) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment);


confusing

defendants motion to dismiss in ali case cites it this way:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0041.pdf
	First, due process confers no entitlement on persons in the United States  regarding the entry  of others. See Kerry v. Din,135 S.Ct. 2129, 2131 (plurality opinion) (“There is no such constitutional right.”)  


sounds like what it said


guess ali v. Trump might due better on problems with equal protection?

dunno about that

say EO were actually motivated by something reasonable or more justifiable, e.g. say everyone in north korea is brainwashed and 99% of immigrants from there are terrorists

ban immigration from NK, and citizens from NK in U.S. are screwed over--can't get family members to join them, or much harder

but does it really make sense to argue equal protection in that case?

I guess real problem with EO for this case is that it was hard to justify how it helped national security at all 


for whatever reason ali v. trump doesn't have anything on establishment clause

and for equal protection mentions nationality first, then last point "oh by the way it's also a Muslim ban"

2nd petition had establishment clause

just went into legal limbo



------


Kerry v. Din confusing

ruling says "there is no constitutionally protected liberty interest"

a ceaveat to this I didn't get? Like is conditional maybe?

motion for preliminary injunction in ali v. Trump says this:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0006.pdf
	The Supreme Court’s decision in Kerry v. Dinfurther illustrates the Court’s refusal to close the courtroom doors to review of executive decisions affecting the constitutional rights of citizens.  In Din, a U.S. citizen wife challenged the State Department’s denial of an immigrant visa to her husband.135 S. Ct.2128 (2015).  The Court issued a plurality opinion in which Justice Kennedy’s concurrence controls.12Justice Kennedy assumed that the visa denial implicated Ms. Din’s constitutionally protected interests, and considered whether it was “facially legitimate and bonafide.”13In so doing, Justice Kennedy made two key holdings.First, he found that the admission that Ms. Din’s husband worked as a secretary for the Taliban “even if itself insufficient to support exclusion,” was enough of an individualized articulated facial connection to terrorist activity to support a finding of inadmissibility. 135 S. Ct. at 1241 (Kennedy, J, concurring). Second, he found that Ms. Din had“not plausibly alleged with sufficient particularity” bad faith on the part of the government. 

	Neither of the distinctions Justice Kennedy found critical in Din are present here.  The EO at issue in this case is not individualized with respect to any immigrant visa beneficiary or petitioner; rather, it constitutes a generalized blanket denial of entries and immigrant visa issuance. Such a categorical exclusion that lacks any facial connection to an immigrant visa petitioner or beneficiary is sufficient to establish standing.  In addition, unlike the petitioner in Din, Plaintiffs have alleged that the EO is, at least in part, motivated by animus against a religionand nationalities, which constitutes bad faith bythe government.  Thus, at a minimum, Plaintiffs meet Justice Kennedy’s threshold test and, as such, have standing to seek this Court’s review of their due process claim under a rational basis test (seesupran.13).


I guess saying Kerry v. Din doesn't apply because the gov had a specific good reason to not allow Din's husband and Din couldn't argue the gov acted in bad faith.

Says supreme court "left door open" on saying citizens bringing family over have due process rights with Din, I guess because they based their decision on the what the lawyers argue are "critical disntictions."


was Kerry v. Din being general when saying "no liberty interest" in living with spouse?

https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/13-1402_e29g.pdf
	Most strikingly, perhaps, the Expatriation Act of 1907provided that “any American woman who marries a for­eigner shall take the nationality of her husband.” Ch. 2534, 34 Stat. 1228. Thus, a woman in Din’s position not only lacked a liberty interest that might be affected by the Government’s disposition of her husband’s visa applica­tion, she lost her own rights as a citizen upon marriage.


so basically lawyer saying it's not the same because its different??

or these are key differences


asks: what is law after Kerry v. Din?

http://www.scottimmigration.net/content/what-law-following-kerry-v-din
	The Supreme Court recently ruled on Kerry v Din, 576 US ____ (2015). It was a much anticipated case as it was perceived as the case where the Doctrine of Consular Nonreviewability would be either upheld or struck down. In the end neither of those outcomes materialized. The Court had a three-way split in its opinions, with no one opinion signed by a majority of the Justices. This means the case created no new precedent case law. 


so like what you can ignore it?

	... Three Justices – Scalia, Thomas, and Roberts – opined that the refusal of a visa did not impinge on a constitutionally protected interest of the citizen spouse. Four Justices – Breyer, Sotomayor, Kagan, and Ginsburg – opined that the refusal of a visa did impinge on a constitutionally protected interest of the citizen spouse and that indeed that spouse is entitled to a better explanation than a broad legal citation. Two Justices – Kennedy and Alito – opined that whether there was a constitutionally protected interest of the citizen spouse in the case is irrelevant because even presuming there is one, the simple legal citation is enough explanation in light of the section of law specifically excusing the government from elaborating and in light of the fact that the ground of inadmissibility in question is one of terrorist activity and national security interests. 


split on whether living with spouse is "constitutionally protected liberty interest"

so speaking in general sounds like

seems like common sense that this is a liberty interest

I guess they didn't make a final decision on whether or not it is for use in case law


this makes it pretty clear: from govs argument against motion for preliminary injucntion in ali v. Trump:


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0011.pdf
	The Supreme Court’s recent decision in Kerry v. Din did nothing to change the calculus. 135 S. Ct. 2128 (2015). In that case, Justice Kennedy , in his concurring and controlling opinion, did not opine as to whether a U.S. citizen has a protected liberty interest in her marriage entitling her to limit ed judicial review. Din , 135 S.Ct. at 2139. Instead, Justice Kennedy concluded that “even assuming” Din had such an interest, “the notice she received regarding her husband’s visa denial satisfied due process.”


so supreme court punted again

no precedent on whether living with spouse "liberty interest"


------


http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1702/07/sitroom.02.html
	FLENTJE: Yes.

	Let me finish with the first theory, and then I will get to that.

	The parens patriae theory assumes you're asserting the rights on behalf of the beneficiary. But there's well-established law that, in the immigration context, the sort of third-party interest -- and the case O'Bannon (ph) describes this -- is not something that can be asserted. I'd also...

	CLIFTON: I suggest Kerry v. Din asserts exactly that.

	I mean, in Kerry vs. Din, the plaintiff, Din, was the wife of the person who was excluded. So the person who was excluded may not have had any rights that he could assert directly, but his wife was allowed to.

	FLENTJE: Right. And the state doesn't have the sort of constitutional rights that the wife in Din had. The wife in Din was asserting her own...

	CLIFTON: Why isn't the state's right the same as the scholars in Mandel? Mandel was a foreigner. He might not have had rights, but the course took the case up, because the people who argued they wanted to be able to hear him, the various universities to which he'd been invited.

	Well, University of Washington, Washington State invite people. Why doesn't the state of Washington have the same standing that the scholars did in Mandel?

	[18:20:03]

	FLENTJE: The -- again, you have to look at sort of the right of the state.

	And I guess I was discussing the right of the state on behalf of the people that it wants -- it's bringing suit on behalf of. It's sort of collapsing the inquiry.

	CLIFTON: Well, I understand you're moving away, or I'm dragging you away from the parens patriae theory.

	Just speaking for myself, I agree with you on that. The state can't do that. But the state is also asserting a proprietary interest, in particular as the owner and operator of the universities. And it seems to me they line up very much as the way the plaintiffs in Mandel did. 


I think this is saying Clifton could believe Din could "assert rights" about her husband? Dunno if this has to do with right to live with spouse, but maybe speaking to whether you can sue for something that happened to your spouse in cases like this at all?


	...CANBY: It's Judge Canby. As far as the Establishment Clause claim goes, the government takes a position, I think, that -- that in weighing the validity of your Establishment Clause claim, you're confined to the four corners of the instrument. What's your comment on that?

	PURCELL: Your honor, I think the case law shows that that's wrong. I think -- I think it was Judge Clifton who pointed out -- or Judge Friedland, I'm sorry, or maybe both. Kerry versus Din says exactly the opposite. That if there's -- if the plaintiff makes plausible allegations, sufficiently supported of bad faith, the court can look behind the motives.

	And in those cases, just to be clear, those are cases where the -- the case had to do with excluding an alien who had never been here and had no right to be here. So if anything, the court should take a more -- a harder look at the real motives in a case where there are significant impacts on people who do live here, who've been here for many years, who are longtime residents and who clearly are entitled, themselves, to constitutional rights of due process and equal protection, unlike in Kerry and Mandell, where really it was, you know -- the rights being harmed were of the people overseas. It was their -- the people here who were asserting them. 


don't get this--was din asserting rights of her husband too?

whatever going on comes off that Kerry v. Dinn helping plantiffs more than hurting


https://www.c-span.org/video/?423694-1/washington-minnesota-v-trump-oral-argument
	FRIEDLAND

	I thought you were using Din and Mandel as your main authority for the -- the unreviewability. And -- and so, now you're saying those are distinguishable. I'm a little confused whether you're relying on those cases or not.


sounds like opposite

trying to argue Din and Mandel say review limited (their doc goes something like "even with the limited review allowed by Mandel and Din...")


------


http://www.scottimmigration.net/content/what-law-following-kerry-v-din
	“Notices of Denials.-

	(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3) if an alien's application for a visa, for admission to the United States, or for adjustment of status is denied by an immigration or consular officer because the officer determines the alien to be inadmissible under subsection (a), the officer shall provide the alien with a timely written notice that-

	(A) states the determination, and

	(B) lists the specific provision or provisions of law under which the alien is inadmissible or adjustment of status.

	(2) The Secretary of State may waive the requirements of paragraph (1) with respect to a particular alien or any class or classes of inadmissible aliens. (3) Paragraph (1) does not apply to any alien inadmissible under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (a).” [emphasis added; paragraph (2) of subsection (a) is criminal inadmissibility, and paragraph (3) of subsection (a) is national security grounds of inadmissibility.]

	That section of law excusing the government from providing details for the denial do not apply to most grounds of inadmissibility, such as prior unlawful presence, misrepresentation, false claim of citizenship, or re-entry without inspection following more than a year of unlawful presence (INA §212(a)(9)(C)). Part of why the court was split three ways was because of that specific section of law excusing the government from elaborating. 


statutes on deniel of visa provide for "timely notice" and reasons for why visa denied, with an exception for national security.

Trump would have trouble arguing a six-year-old was a risk to national security, though


------


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0006.pdf

pg 18

says that because relatives of Ali and other U.S. resident plaintiffs were denied visas abruptly and without notice or evidence, and this was arbitrary. Cites delcarations of plaintiffs. Cites Shanks v. Dressel to say this "flies in face" of due process (suggesting that conduct may be "constitutionally arbitrary" when there is evidence "of a sudden change in course, malice, bias, [or] pretext")


pg 19

says continue to face irreparable harm because separated from their loved ones


------

NBC News

	Trump Administration Previews Defense of New Travel Order


	...The new executive order contains "a roust waiver provision," allowing exceptions to the 90-day ban on travel from six countries. "That case-by-case process plainly satisfies any possible due process requirements," the administration argued, when a U.S. citizen, company, or university seeks the entry of someone overseas.


	...The government says the new order gives examples of when a waiver could be appropriate, including when a foreign national "seeks to enter the United States to visit a close family member."


they also basically admit in Hawaii v Trump court doc (one filed on 3/13/17) that previous EO didn't cover due process with its waiver

in declaration of Ali v. Trump, Muhummad Ali says he his attorney asked for waiver for his daughter on 28th but Dijibuti embassy said they didn't have guidance for that:

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-WA-0028-0005.pdf

	On January 28, 2017, my attorney sent a letter to the U.S. Embassy in Djibouti requesting that my daughter E.A.A. be issued a travel letter because she should qualify for a case-by-case exemption to the executive order because it would in the national interest to permit her to come to the United States with our family. She spoke to a consular officer in Djibouti on January 30, 2017, but was informed that the embassy did not have guidance yet on how the waivers to the executive action would be reviewed or issued.


also speaks to how chaotic implementation made unconstitutional, same thing happened with LPRs

