
http://d279m997dpfwgl.cloudfront.net/wp/2017/02/memo.jpg

"I hereby provisionally revoke all valid nonimmigrant and immigrant visas of nationals of Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, subject [EO exceptions]"


------


Trump admin was manually removing affeted travellers from GES over weekend after ban

the state dept provisionally revoked all visas for travellers affected by ban, which would include returning LPRs

is that right?

https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us-visas/visa-information-resources/all-visa-categories.html

says "returning resident" has "SB" visa

https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us-visas/immigrate/returning-resident.html
	A permanent resident (called lawful permanent resident or LPR) or conditional resident (CR) who has remained outside the United States for longer than one year, or beyond the validity period of a Re-entry Permit, will require a new immigrant visa to enter the United States and resume permanent residence. A provision exists under U.S. visa law for the issuance of a returning resident special immigrant visa to an LPR who remained outside the United States due to circumstances beyond his/her control. This webpage is about Returning Resident Visas. If you are an LPR unable to return to the United States within the travel validity period of the green card (1 year) or the validity of the Re-entry Permit (2 years), you may be eligible and can apply at the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate for a Returning Resident (SB-1) immigrant visa.


this says LPRs out for long periods of time can get an SB visa

but do statues and court cases for returning residents apply in this case?

I think it depends on which country you travel to too:

https://www.quora.com/As-a-USA-Green-Card-holder-permanent-resident-which-countries-can-I-visit-for-tourism-without-needing-a-visa-for-that-country

pretty sure a green card doesn't count as a visa

http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/court-order-iranian-man-beat-trump-travel-ban-article-1.2962934
	Iranian national Ali Vayeghan, 52, touched down shortly after 1 p.m. at LAX airport, capping a six-day saga that derailed his admittance on a green card immigration visa 


kindof confusing


so if I understand right, green cards wouldn't be cancelled, but visas for visiting certain countries would

also depends on where you got your passport from:

https://artoftravel.tips/as-a-us-green-card-holder-permanent-resident-irrespective-of-your-country-of-citizenship-to-which-countries-can-you-visit-without-needing-a-visa-for-the-destination-country/
	The Reality is that your permanent residency status in the USA doesn’t influence your need for Visas, while your actual citizenship does. So your passport issuing country is more critical to your international traveling abilities.

so if visas cancelled to the letter of the state department's memo, would get a subset of LPRs stranded, but not all

if passport in different country and got visa from them, could U.S. still cancel? I guess so, if it's for travel to the U.S.

kindof confusing

would an LPR ever need a visa to travel back to the U.S.? you'd think not

I guess would need certain visas to travel out of the U.S.

but you gotta wonder how on earth did LPRs ever end up getting denied boarding on return flights to U.S.? airline acting according to "guidance?" AQQ response? computer error? called up CBP?

should this leter have effected any return travel of LPRs?


------

court case about visas cancelled from state dept letter Al-Mowafak v. Trump

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0088-0001.pdf

pg 3

	...Also on January 27, 2017, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Visa Services at the Bureau of Consular Affairs of the Department of State, relying on the authority of the Executive Order, summarily and provisionally revoked all valid nonimmigrant and immigrant visas of nationals of the seven predominantly Muslim Countries, subject to exceptions not relevant here. This revocation (“the Provisional Revocation Letter”) threatens countless nationals of the Designated Countries who are currently in the United States or who reside in the United States but were traveling abroad when the letter was issued.


pg 4

	...Plaintiffs include nationals of the Designated Countries who are or have been lawfully present in California and who, but for the Executive Order and/or the Provisional Revocation Letter, have the lawful right to travel to and from the United States. 


so these are residents who got their visas cancelled by the letter and are suing

plantiffs:

F-1 student visa who wants to visit her husband in Yemen

student stuck oustide U.S. visting family

student worried won't be able to get work if he can't travel


looks like none of named plaintiffs are LPRs