

Trump signed Executive Order 13769, the "travel ban," on Friday, January 27th, 2017. The Executive Order suspended the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program for 120 days, suspended the admission of Syrian refugees indefinitely, and, most notably, blocked entry of all travel into the United States of non-citizens from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen (with minor exceptions) for 90 days. Trump signed the order to be effective immediately with little warning, notably without clear direction to officials and officers responsible for implementing the ban in the DHS, and without notifying lawyers who would be responsible for defending the ban in court at DOJ. The ban led to chaos, confusion, and legal challenges almost as soon as it was signed. On Monday, January 30th, Trump fired acting attorney general Sally Yates a few hours after she directed the DOJ not to defend the ban in court.




wh EO? why rush rollout? why chaos? why not tell DOJ, other officials? why fire yates?


The account of Trump and his administration is this:

Many terrorist attacks in the U.S. have been carried about by people born in foreign countries, and the seven countries named in the Executive Order are sources of terror. The problem of terrorist attacks by the foreign-born is so dire that a 90-day ban entry of foreign nationals from the countries named in the Executive Order is needed until the U.S. can figure out how to vet these people for ties to terrorism or attitudes and beliefs conducive to terrorism. Although this may be unpleasant, it is necessary and urgent for national security:


https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4653208/president-trump-signs-travel-ban-executive-order
	Trump: I'm establishing new vetting measures to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America. We don't want them here. We want to ensure we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas. We only want to admit those into our country who will support our country and love, deeply, our people.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/827865957750161408
	Donald J. Trump‏
	Feb 4

	Interesting that certain Middle-Eastern countries agree with the ban. They know if certain people are allowed in it's death & destruction!


https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-protecting-nation-foreign-terrorist-entry-united-states/
	Executive Order Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States

	...Numerous foreign-born individuals have been convicted or implicated in terrorism-related crimes since September 11, 2001, including foreign nationals who entered the United States after receiving visitor, student, or employment visas, or who entered through the United States refugee resettlement program. Deteriorating conditions in certain countries due to war, strife, disaster, and civil unrest increase the likelihood that terrorists will use any means possible to enter the United States. The United States must be vigilant during the visa-issuance process to ensure that those approved for admission do not intend to harm Americans and that they have no ties to terrorism.

	In order to protect Americans, the United States must ensure that those admitted to this country do not bear hostile attitudes toward it and its founding principles.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/825692045532618753
	Donald J. Trump
	Jan 29

	Our country needs strong borders and extreme vetting, NOW. Look what is happening all over Europe and, indeed, the world - a horrible mess!


https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf
	Feburary 7, 2017

	...Two States challenged the Executive Order as unconstitutional and violative of federal law, and a federal district court preliminarily ruled in their favor and temporarily enjoined enforcement of the Executive Order. The Government now moves for an emergency stay of the district court’s temporary restraining order while its appeal of that order proceeds.

	...the Government has argued that emergency relief is necessary to support its efforts to prevent terrorism


https://www.facebook.com/DonaldTrump/posts/10158567643610725
	Donald J. Trump
	January 29

	Statement Regarding Recent Executive Order Concerning Extreme Vetting

	...America is a proud nation of immigrants and we will continue to show compassion to those fleeing oppression, but we will do so while protecting our own citizens and border.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/826044059647107073
	Donald J. Trump
	Jan 30

	There is nothing nice about searching for terrorists before they can enter our country. This was a big part of my campaign. Study the world!


It is necessary to implement the ban without warning--otherwise, potential terrorist would realize the window to travel to the country is closing, and would rush in before the ban is enacted. Were this to happen, it would be a time of great peril for our country:


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	TRUMP: ...Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.

	You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that's like you. You have some bad people out there.

	Kelly said you can't do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don't have time to come in.

	Now nobody ever reports that. But that's why we did it quickly.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/826060143825666051
	Donald J. Trump‏
	Jan 30

	If the ban were announced with a one week notice, the "bad" would rush into our country during that week. A lot of bad "dudes" out there!


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/827996357252243456
	Donald J. Trump‏
	Feb 4

	Because the ban was lifted by a judge, many very bad and dangerous people may be pouring into our country. A terrible decision


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a5mFBHJKfwE&t=8m15s
	And you know, this is a very dangerous period of time because while everybody is talking and dealing, a lot of bad people are thinking about, hey, let's go in right now.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/828342202174668800
	Donald J. Trump‏
	Feb 5

	Just cannot  believe a judge would put our country in such peril. If something happens blame him and court system. People pouring in. Bad!


Not only that, the ban had to be kept secret even from all but a few officials in the DHS and DOJ. Possibly, they were too partisan, and couldn't be trusted. Or, they might leak the the Executive Order and give the terrorists warning to come in:


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-rush-immigration-order-chaos.html
	...A senior administration official said that the order was drafted in cooperation with some immigration experts on Capitol Hill and members of the “beachhead teams” — small groups of political appointees sent by the new White House to be liaisons and begin work at the agencies.

	James Jay Carafano, a vice president of the conservative Heritage Foundation and a member of Mr. Trump’s transition team, said that little of that work was shared with career officials at the Homeland Security Department, the State Department or other agencies.

	There was “a firewall between the old administration and the incoming one,” Mr. Carafano said.

	One reason, he said, is that when the Trump transition team asked pointed questions suggesting new policies to the career officials, those questions were swiftly leaked to the news media, generating negative stories. So the Trump team began to limit the information they discussed with officials from the previous administration.

	“Why share it with them?” Mr. Carafano said.


Even with such short notice, the travel ban had an excellent rollout. There reports of chaos and confusion have some credibility, but this was caused by computer problems with Delta Airlines, the court decisions, protesters at the airports, and grand-standing by Chuck Schumer:


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	Feb 16 2017

	QUESTION: On the travel ban -- we could banter back and forth. On the travel ban would you accept that that was a good example of the smooth running of government...

	TRUMP: Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government...

	QUESTION: Were there any mistakes...

	TRUMP: Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait.

	Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that's been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it's 80 percent of the time, a lot.

	We had a bad decision. We're going to keep going with that decision. We're going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision.

	That's the other thing that was wrong with the travel ban. You had Delta with a massive problem with their computer system at the airports. You had some people that were put out there, brought by very nice busses, and they were put out at various locations.

	Despite that the only problem that we had is we had a bad court. We had a court that gave us what I consider to be, with great respect, a very bad decision. Very bad for the safety and security of our country. The rollout was perfect.


https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/826041397232943104

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/826042483155013632
	Donald J. Trump
	Jan 30

	Only 109 people out of 325,000 were detained and held for questioning. Big problems at airports were caused by Delta computer outage, protesters and the tears of Senator Schumer. Secretary Kelly said that all is going well with very few problems. MAKE AMERICA SAFE AGAIN!


Acting Attorney General Sally Yates was fired for ordering the DOJ not to defend the travel ban. In doing this, she had jeopardized national security and betrayed the department of justice:


https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/statement-appointment-dana-boente-acting-attorney-general/
	The acting Attorney General, Sally Yates, has betrayed the Department of Justice by refusing to enforce a legal order designed to protect the citizens of the United States. This order was approved as to form and legality by the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel.

	Ms. Yates is an Obama Administration appointee who is weak on borders and very weak on illegal immigration.

	It is time to get serious about protecting our country. Calling for tougher vetting for individuals travelling from seven dangerous places is not extreme. It is reasonable and necessary to protect our country.

	Tonight, President Trump relieved Ms. Yates of her duties



What actually happened:

...

The night of January 24th, Reuters [reports](http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/24/trump-to-restrict-immigration-from-several-middle-east-countries-reuters.html) that Trump is expected to sign the travel ban the next day. He doesn't sign the ban,  

ban to be signed leaked 23rd

draft leaked 24th

large protests

Trump talks about it on ABC with Muir 25th


protests about being Muslim ban


Trump 


...

turns out it is a Muslim ban

this is unconstitutional

established by Trump's public statements, text of EO

"well established" courts look at surrounding evidence to determine intent of order

Trump is aware a Muslim ban is unconstitutional, even as he makes statements that add to evidence that it is a Muslim ban

ban is legally doomed

but doom comes early

...

Ban signed

CBP officers not told, get confusing directives as to how to implement, if it applies to LPRs. "caught by surprise" and confused about court orders, even basics of the ban. Conflicting directions, unclear guidance.

CBP has ordered airlines to ban travel into U.S., including for LPRs

because ban signed immediately, travelers caught off guard. Get on plane before ban, get off after and get detained. Be about to come home, next day find you are blocked.

LPRs detained, stranded, visas denied, global chaos

This leads to lawsuits, court orders

Court cases pile up, three injunctions against ban, flights are being diverted to Boston (Dulles?) to get around ban

It is up to DOJ to stop court orders and save "national security"


...


doj has not been informed of ban:


http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1705/19/acd.03.html
    COOPER: If the department of justice, their office of legal counsel was given a heads up so to speak about this and asked to review it, wouldn't they have given you head's up about it?

    YATES: Normally, they would. But my understanding is that they were asked not to tell us about it.

    COOPER: The department of justice's office of legal counsel was advised not to inform you specifically, the acting attorney general about this executive order.

    YATES: That's my understanding.

    COOPER: Do you know why you were not informed?

    YATES: I don't know. And I wasn't informed.

    COOPER: Is that normal procedure?

    YATES: No. First I heard of that.

    COOPER: You never heard it happening before.

    YATES: No.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	KLOBUCHAR: And during that meeting did they mention -- anyone mention that this refugee order was about to come out?

	YATES: No.

	KLOBUCHAR: Did the acting Attorney General of the United States?

	YATES: No and that was one thing that was of concern to us, is that not only was department leadership not consulted here and beyond department leadership, really the subject matter experts, the national security experts, not only was the department not consulted, we weren't even told about it. I learned about this from media reports.

...

DOJ, fed attorneys do a very bad job of defending against these orders in court

they aren't getting much help from Trump admin

some try to argue: maybe court order not necessary, maybe gov can sort it out, maybe it doesn't really apply to LPRs

CPB orders airlines to ban travel in defiance of court orders brought for stranded LPRs.

Trump and his surrogates are still making public statements that establish it's a Muslim ban


So EO basically over at this point. DOJ look like idiots, probably unhappy at this point, legal battle is stacked against them.

Yates meets with lawyers that Monday. Lawyers tired, humiliated. The state of Washington had just filed a complaint saying the whole EO is unconstitutional. Someone tells Yates she has to make a judgement on the order's constitutionality by Monday...


...






------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/30/politics/trump-travel-ban-q-and-a/
	It was a wild couple of days of chaos and confusion after President Trump signed his travel ban. Not up to speed on what went down over the weekend? Here's a quick primer.

	What happened?






------




https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf
	...Although we agree that “the Government’s interest in combating terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order,” Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project , 561 U.S. 1, 28 (2010), the Government has done little more than reiterate that fact. Despite the district court’s and our own repeated invitations to explain the urgent need for the Executive Order to be placed immediately into effect, the Government submitted no evidence to rebut the States’ argument that the district court’s order merely returned the nation temporarily to the position it has occupied for many previous years.



https://www.facebook.com/DonaldTrump/posts/10158567643610725
	Jan 29

	We will keep it free and keep it safe, as the media knows, but refuses to say. My policy is similar to what President Obama did in 2011 when he banned visas for refugees from Iraq for six months. The seven countries named in the Executive Order are the same countries previously identified by the Obama administration as sources of terror. To be clear, this is not a Muslim ban, as the media is falsely reporting. 


Trump knows something like his EO can pass, and knows "partisan" judges will be up against him. He's no stranger to courts.

He appears to believe all Obama appointees out to get him.

So he knows he's up for a tough battle against courts.

So here's an alibi for not keeping Yates in the loop: he thinks she will collude with courts, not defend his ban, or try to sabotage the whole thing.

In this case, the obvious thing to do is to wait for AG to be installed, go ahead.

Otherwise, anyone can predict what would happen: the ban would lose in court, and Trump would have "shown his hand" to these dangerous terrorists.

The Democrats in Congress have been delaying his pick for AG

Trump might think, how am I going to get this ban out there then? will I have to wait until Congress gives me an AG?

so he decides to do the ban anyway, without informing the DOJ, most of the DHS...

but he has to expect the ban will fail, and show his hand--it's a stupid move.

So what is motivation?

Only thing he would get out of it that is clear is that it will give him a shot at firing AG and getting "his people in." This is an immediate problem for Trump one way or another.

And, in fact, making it obvious to court it's a Muslim ban and expediating litigation makes that happen.

And so this is the same argument as before, but with a different motivation: to clear an AG he thinks is undermining his travel ban, or in general.

This doesn't help Trump much, but shift in motive means can argue not provably guilty of obstruction of Justice, but maybe abuse of power (global chaos to get rid of AG).

It's hard to think of any other motive for sending out an obvious Muslim ban to a legal battle he knows he'll lose (apparently thinks both legal defense and offense against him). But could be... would have to be creative?


------


