

http://www.judicialwatch.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/JW-v-DOJ-Yates-docs-Nov-17-00832.pdf

pg 39

    From: Wilkinson, Monty (USAEO)
    Sent: Monday, January 30, 2017 3:18 PM
    To: USAEO-USAttorneysOnly
    Subject: Message from the Acting Attorney General


    The Acting Attorney General asked that I forward the attacked message to you.


    Monty


    [Message from the Acting Attorn...]



I think this means Yates "decision" officially kicked off Jan 30, 3:18 PM

there was that other email where it gets forwarded to a big list of people

this was sent to a catch-all kind of email looks like



------


http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1705/19/acd.03.html
    COOPER: So you would have to wait until Flynn was interviewed by the FBI?

    YATES: Well, it was a combination of factors where we looked at that as well as the fact that it was the misrepresentations that didn't really start until mid-January that aggravated the situation. 


what was the real reason? wait until Trump in office?


    ...COOPER: What did you tell the White House, hence with Don McGahn?

    YATES: Well, we had two meetings with Don McGahn. And I took actually the person who was overseeing this investigation, a senior career official from the department of justice with me there. And we began the meeting by pointing out from statements that have been made by the vice president and Sean Spicer and others with respect to General Flynn's conduct and let him know that we knew that it wasn't true and how we knew it wasn't true and what our evidence was and what he had actually done. 


pretty clear she's talking about discussing sanctions.

Also "I know it might seem artificial to some folks"


    ...COOPER: Did Don McGahn tell you what he was going to do with that information?

    YATES: No. I mean, we went through and told him not only what we knew but why we were concerned about it and why we were telling him about it. And you know, again, that the public had been misled. We were very concerned about the underlying conduct and went through and explained the compromise significance with the Russians and told him specifically that we were giving them this information so they could act.


"very concerned" about underlying conduct


    ...COOPER: So he would have been aware that this is unusual to have the acting attorney general coming over and doing this on such urgent notice in a shift.

    YATES: Sure, Mr. McGahn got it. He knew that this was serious and that it was important. 


McGahn would have known Yates' warning was important. Says wanted to meet in person, sensitive matter, in SCIF


    ...COOPER: Was the underline conduct illegal? Was it illegality of all?

    YATES: There is certainly a criminal statute that was implicated by his conduct. 


Flynn conduct pointing to criminal prosecution


    ...COOPER: The seriousness of her warning is not the only significant discrepancy between Yates and the White House. She said she made the evidence investigators have gathered on Flynn available to the White House on Monday, January 30th. That's not what the White House said.

    SPICER: They didn't get access to that underline evidence described by Ms. Yates until February 2nd.

    COOPER: He couldn't look (INAUDIBLE).

    YATES: Yes. It was ready on Monday, the 30th.


Evdience ready on 30th, didn't look at it until 2nd.

Presumably, the evidnce implicates Trump somehow? dunno

why wouldn't they want Yates to show them the evidence? Would it mean Trump would know he would face legal scrutiny?

something off about being so concerned Flynn vulnerable to blackmail. Wouldn't many members of Trump's team by vulnerable to blackmail from Russia?


    COOPER: So you wanted the White House to act.

    YATES: Absolutely, yes.

    COOPER: To do so.

    [23:20:00] YATES: We expected the White House to act.

    COOPER: Did you expect them to act quickly?

    YATES: Yes.

    COOPER: There was urgency to the information.

    YATES: Yes. I called on January 30th, that Monday morning to let Mr. McGahn know that it was ready. We had made arrangements over the weekend. That was one of the other issue that he had raised in the second meeting was whether they could look at the under lying evidence that established General Flynn's conduct. And you know, this is really unusual for us or for the FBI to allow that.

    COOPER: Because there was an ongoing investigation.

    YATES: Right. But this was really important. We have given them a good bit of detail about what the conduct was. This is not a situation where we came in and just gave him a conclusion. We walked through in a fair amount of detail what General Flynn had done. But --. 


Yates told McGahn about the evidence in detail, which is unusual since there was an ongoing investigation

    
    COOPER: Had you also given the White House information about what General Flynn had told the FBI in his interviewed.

    YATES: No, we didn't. We told him that he was interviewed. And we told him he had interviewed two days before that but we did not tell him what he had said.


I guess this is important. Yates keeps saying she told McGahn in detail about what Flynn did, but didn't talk about interview performance. So whatever action Trump took after would have been influenced by this evidence and not Flynn's conduct on interview.


    COOPER: Did done Don McGahn want to know how Flynn had done in his FBI interview?

    YATES: Yes, he did. He asked me how he did. And I just declined to answer that.

    COOPER: Why?

    YATES: Well, because that was something that really impacted our investigation. That wasn't information that the White House needed to know to be able to make a national security assessment.

    COOPER: So if Flynn had lied to FBI investigators or had not been credible in his answers that - well that is important to your investigation, the FBI investigation. That is not something you felt was important for the White House to know.

    YATES: It wasn't essential for them to know on that. I mean, we were trying to put them on notice what he had done and the fact he lied about if and the compromise situation that this created and we were trying to give them as much informations we could about that again so that they can act.


sounds hesitent in answer? I guess Russians couldn't blackmail Flynn on lying to the FBI if nobody knew about it. Couldn't they blackmail him on other things like lying on his forms about work for turkey?


    ...COOPER: Do you agree there was no legal issue with Flynn's underlying behavior?

    YATES: I don't know how the White House reached the conclusion that there was no legal issue. It certainly wasn't from my discussion with them.


again, sounds like there were some legal issues with Flynn's conduct (Logan act?)


    COOPER: If you hadn't been fired, if you are still in your position and you hadn't seen action over the course of that 18 days, was there more your role as the acting attorney general would have permitted you to do?

    YATES: I would have gone back to the White House.

    COOPER: If you were still the acting attorney general, you would have gone back to the White House.

    YATES: I have been knocking on the door then, yes.

    COOPER: Why?

    YATES: Because I would have been concerned that we had a national security advisor who was compromised. I wouldn't be able to control what happened, but I would have gone back to White House. 


sounds like Yates didn't want to be fired. So why write that memo?

also looks bad for the WH. They fired Yates, but she would've kept pressing them on Flynn.


    ...COOPER: What sort of questions would you have asked?

    YATES: What have you done?


good question 


yates says she is a Democrat (I thought she was a republican?)


    ...JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL: Do you think the attorney general has a responsibility to say no to the President if he asks for something that is improper. If the views the President wants to execute are unlawful should the attorney general or deputy attorney general say no.

    YATES: Senator, I believe that the attorney general or the deputy attorney general has an obligation to follow the law and the constitution and to give their independent legal advice to the President. 


Yates said a long time ago she would stand up to the President. Did she ever do that under Obama? Could Trump have predicted she wouldn't defend his travel ban? (idk seems kindof obvious?)


    ...When did you first hear about the travel ban?

    YATES: Well, it was Friday afternoon, later Friday afternoon around 5:00 or so when I was in the car on the way to the airport.

    COOPER: This is the same day --?

    YATES: Same day.

    COOPER: Of you second meeting with Don McGahn?

    YATES: Right. I had been meeting with Mr. McGahn around 3:00 that afternoon. And his office there at the White House. And I was on my way back to Atlanta for an event the next night. My husband was being honored at a dinner in Atlanta. So I was on the way to the airport and I got a call from my principal deputy saying he saw online, on a news report that the President had issued an executive order with respect to immigration. And this was the very first we had heard of it.


First heard of travel ban at 5:00 in the car after second interview with McGah at 3:00 on 27th Jan


    ...COOPER: You're the acting attorney general of the United States of America.

    YATES: Right.

    COOPER: And you did not know about this executive order.

    YATES: That's right.

    COOPER: The department of justice has an office of legal counsel and they had been asked to weigh in on this executive order.

    YATES: They have been asked to review to review for that is called form and legality.


OLC asked to "form and legality," I guess not asked to review how well it would hold up in court?


    COOPER: If the department of justice, their office of legal counsel was given a heads up so to speak about this and asked to review it, wouldn't they have given you head's up about it?

    YATES: Normally, they would. But my understanding is that they were asked not to tell us about it.

    COOPER: The department of justice's office of legal counsel was advised not to inform you specifically, the acting attorney general about this executive order.

    YATES: That's my understanding.

    COOPER: Do you know why you were not informed?

    YATES: I don't know. And I wasn't informed.

    COOPER: Is that normal procedure?

    YATES: No. First I heard of that.

    COOPER: You never heard it happening before.

    YATES: No.

    COOPER: Was it, well, just don't kick this up higher in the department of justice or don't tell Sally Yates?

    YATES: I don't know all the details about that.


The OLC was specifically asked not to inform Yates, it's weird, and she doesn't know why.


    COOPER: Reports around the country the legal challenges came the next day. Sally Yates had to decide what she would do.

    YATES: We spend the weekend and a flurry of activity trying to get our arms around what is this thing and what are they trying to accomplish.


DOJ scrambing to figure out EO, sounds right


    COOPER: When did you make the decision you were going to instruct your attorneys, the department of justice not to enforce this or not to argue this?

    YATES: Well, on Monday, I brought in the folks from the department of justice who were hands on involve in this. That would include the career people at DOJ, as well as the Trump appointees that were at DOJ at this time. And I had pulled up many of the legal challenges that we had and had read through those, and looked at cases, had written down the issues that I was concerned about.


Yates is asked when she made the decision to instruct attorney's not to defend the ban. She doesn't answer directly. Says on monday gathered the people who were presumably out defending the emergency legal challenges to the ban over the weekend. She was looking at the legal challenges and cases and writing down her concerns.


I guess it would be weird to not address the DOJ and their struggling to defend the ban on Monday. But why did she have to make the decision then and there?


    COOPER: Had you already seen what was happening at airports?

    YATES: Sure. Yes, on TV. I have seen what is happening.

    COOPER: You have seen people coming in, people demonstrating, you saw the impact that was having. Did that have an impact on you?

    YATES: It had an impact in terms of the chaos that was created. But I was trying to get a handle on what did this executive order do and was it lawful and constitutional. By Monday, I was advised that we are going to have to take a position on the constitutionality statue. The facts reflected that this really was an attempt to make good on President's campaign promise of a Muslim ban. That is was about religion and that if the department of justice on something as essential as religious freedom, I couldn't in good conscience send our DOJ lawyers in to make an argument that wasn't grounded in truth.


Ok, there it is. "By Monday, I was advised that we are going to have to take a position on the constitutionality statute."

why is this ambiguous? was she advised she had to take a position by Monday? Or had she been advised, by monday, that she would have to take a position at some point?

for such an important thing, you'd think she'd go into more detail...

in her hearing, she does say "at the time I had to make my decision"

so, for whatever reason, apparently she "had to make" her decision at that time

probably should read hearing again..


    COOPER: On Monday, January 30th, Yates made a decision. She issued an order to the department of justice not to defend the President's executive order.

    You knew at this point, you were taking - you were challenging the President of the United States.

    YATES: I didn't view it as a challenge to the President of the United States. I viewed it as fulfilling my oath and doing my job.

    COOPER: You knew this was going to bring you into conflict with the President of United States, this desire. Does you think about that?

    YATES: Sure.

    COOPER: Was that - is that an intimidating thought? Is that a, obviously, I mean, that decision you must have known would change the trajectory of your career from then on.

    YATES: Well, certainly, intellectually, I knew that there was a chance I would be fired as a result of this. You know, because stupid not to recognize that was a possibility. But I also knew how I lived and tried to do my job for all of those years, 20-plus years before this. And it seemed to me that to be able to fulfill my oath to represent the people of the United States, to uphold the law and the constitution that this was the course of action that I needed to follow. 


Yates knew there was a possibility she would be fired but asserts she didn't view her decision as a challenge to the President. However, the memo pointed out that the EO might not be "wise" and is not hard to read as a challenge. Zaposoky (irrc) in Wapo said the memo was notable for its defiance. She expresses here multiple times that she didn't want to be fired, yet the memo was written in a way to invite that possibility.

Yates is a sharp person. Either she wanted to be fired and she's lying, or something else was going on with the memo.

goes on to say getting fired was a "punch in the gut," although she strongly suspected she was getting fired when she got the letter.


    ...COOPER: I want to read some of the criticism that you received both from Republicans but also from Democrats. Stephen Miller in the White House said your behavior was reckless, irresponsible, improper. Former deputy attorney general in George W. H. Bush called it quote "foolish naked political move by what appears to be an ambitious holdover official." Was it a political move?

    YATES: No. I was doing my job.

    COOPER: Politics you say had nothing to do with it.

    YATES: Absolutely not, no.

    COOPER: Pardon law professor Alan Dershowitz said that you are a terrific public servant but quote "I think she made a serious mistake here. This is holdover heroism. It is so easy to be heroin when you are nor appointed by this president and when you are on the side." He went on to say he thinks you made a political decision and not a legal one.

    YATES: Well, look. I struggled over the decision whether to resign or whether to direct the department of justice not to defend.

    COOPER: You thought about resigning.

    YATES: Absolutely. Now, I went back and forth.

    COOPER: Because that's what, you know, two former attorney generals, Alberto Gonzales and William Bahr say you should have resigned if you really disagree with this order and that essentially you were grandstanding looking to get out in a way that was such up for a political (INAUDIBLE).

    YATES: Well, putting all that step aside, you know, I think it's a fair question to ask why didn't you just resign. And that is something I grappled with during that time. But sort of the bottom line is that I felt like resigning would have protected my personal integrity. But it would not have protected the integrity of the department of justice.

    COOPER: This does allow you by essentially confronting the President of the United States on this and declining to ask DOJ lawyers to support this executive order, it does set you up in a way -- I mean it is a dramatic finale to a career and sort of brings you into the public mind in a way that you weren't previously. The idea that it's setting up for some sort of political career.

    YATES: Look, I believe in public service. And I hope that in the future I'll be able to have an impact on issue that is I care about. But anybody who knows me knows I have never been interested in running for office. 


Multiple distinguished lawyers say Yates made a political decision and was grandstanding. Yates asserts she was doing her job, politics had nothing to do with it.

Yates says she struggled over whether or not to resign or direct the DOJ not to defend, corraborating LA times report.

Gonzales and Bahr say Yates should have resigned if she really disagreed with the order. Yates doesn't address again but I guess her answer is that she was just doing her job. Says resigning would have helped her personal integrity, but staying would have protected DOJ integrity.

Cooper points out that her decision put her in the spotlight. Yates says she's not interested in a political career.

yates says she refused to defend because it was a Muslim ban, and was vividly clear by Trump's statements


    COOPER: People see you on the street they recognize you, recognize you as you know the person who testified or who -- who took the actions you did on the executive order involved with Michael Flynn. You have an entire career before that. Is it strange to kind of be defined by the last couple of days?

    YATES: Yes it feels a little weird after having been you know a line prosecutor, and a U.S. attorney and deputy attorney general that folks would define me in that way. On the other hand, you know be, they wouldn't have any reason to know about the work that I had done and all the years prior to that. And I believe that the actions that I took with respect to those two issues and in the last ten days were consistent with how I carried out might responsibilities the 27 years prior to that.

    COOPER: You have no regrets?

    YATES: No.

    COOPER: You wouldn't do anything differently.

    YATES: No. 


------


https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/preserving-the-russia-investigation-a-preview-of-our-interview-with-sally-yates
    On January 15th, Vice-President Mike Pence said in an interview with CBS that Flynn and Kislyak had not discussed sanctions. On January 23rd, Spicer gave a summary of Flynn and Kislyak’s discussion, which did not include sanctions. Yates said, “It started out as general stuff, and then you’ve got the Vice-President, and then Sean Spicer on the 23rd gets very specific.” That meant that Flynn was now “compromised” by the Russians, who knew that he had lied to the Vice-President and others and could use that to blackmail him. Yates went on, “Flynn is interviewed on the 24th. We get the readout on the 25th and have consult about impact on investigation, and I call first thing on the 26th.” 


On why Yates waited until 26th to notify WH

    ...Yates said, “When I told him General Flynn had been interviewed”—by the F.B.I.—“it was clear to me that this was not something he already knew about.”


Yates belives McGahn did not already know about the FBI interview of Flynn


    ...Yates told me that she had considered resigning, “but here’s the thing: resignation would have protected my own personal integrity, because I wouldn’t have been part of this, but I believed and I still think that I had an obligation to also protect the integrity of the Department of Justice.” She went on, “We’re not just another law firm. There really is something different about the Department of Justice,” and Yates did not want it to defend an order “that I was not at all convinced was not based on religion.” She said, “I thought back to Jim Crow laws, or literacy tests. Those didn’t say that the purpose was to prevent African-Americans from voting. But that’s what their purpose was.”


yates wanted to protect DOJ, constitution. A good example of laws that have unconstitutional intent that didn't state their purpose in them.


interview is shit, writeup bad

something up with Ryan Lizza?


------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/investigators-interview-sally-yates-about-white-house-meetings-1513034375


Mueller interviewed Yates Dec 11th

    
    ...On Jan. 24, the FBI interviewed Mr. Flynn about the conversations with Mr. Kislyak. Two days later, Ms. Yates and Mary McCord, then the Justice Department’s top national-security prosecutor, met with White House counsel Don McGahn.


Mary McCord the other DOJ official in interview with McGahn.


    ...Shortly after meeting with Ms. Yates, Mr. McGahn briefed Mr. Trump, telling him about the intercepted communications and potential blackmail danger, according to a person familiar with the matter. He also told Mr. Trump that his national-security adviser had been interviewed by the FBI and that he had provided agents the same story he had given the vice president, the person said.


anonymous source says McGahn told Trump Flynn lied to FBI (or enough info to infer that)


    ...In that meeting, Mr. McGahn asked about the applicability of at least two criminal statutes, providing false statements in a criminal investigation and the Logan Act, which bars unauthorized negotiation with foreign governments, said people familiar with the matter.


multiple sources say McGahn asked about two applicable criminal statues: Lying in investigation and Logan act, maybe others.

article seems off

by Del Quentin Wilber


------


https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2017/12/19/what-kind-country-we-speak-out-core-american-values-sally-q-yates-column/951828001/

Sally yates says to stand up, speak truth, hold lying politicians accountable, live up to what nation is supposed to be


------


https://www.judicialwatch.org/press-room/press-releases/judicial-watch-new-justice-department-records-show-strong-support-mueller-deputy-andrew-weissmann-top-doj-officials-yates-refusal-enforce-president-trump-travel-ban/


Judicial watch FOIA shows how yates memo was sent out

some guy forwarded it to someone else saying "Yates aksed me to forward this to you"

then another email has someone forwarding it to a bunch of addresses at DOJ

also some blank emails from yates work email to her personal email with attachments