

bring family to U.S. (?)

and there is a legal history of these extending to non-citizens

and these must apply to all race, national origin, religion, etc. equally

many cases brought forth how the EO denied these rights to immigrants, LPRs, and citizens (bringing family to u.s.)


darweesh, Assali/Syrian family and Yemeni family case (in litigation?) brought forth asylum issues

Ali, Syrian family brought forth bringing over family issues

notably, Louhghalam (Doe? that other one that begins with S?) brought fourth issues of right to travel for U.S. lawful residents



darweesh petition didn't really harm national security (by Trump logic or otherwise) as far as I can tell and probably helped stop Trump admin from shooting themselves in foot more

Louhghalam important because TRO on entire ban for Boston, national security over (accoridng to Trump). Case basically said let LPRs back in according to statues and long explicit legal history. Lead plantiffs two LPRs deported at Logan trying to return. But order stopped EO for Boston. Petition fuzzy on class. In hearing for order, they made it about people getting stranded in general, talked about people suffering harm from being "denied boarding" overseas to U.S.


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0004.pdf

pg 4 Church has problems with LPRs and F-1 visas not being let in, but also has additional reasons for TRO

pg 7 Farquhar learns from opposing counsel that EO blocks people from boarding planes to United States (or hedging since petition didn't mention people unlawfully stranded overseas)

pg 24 plantiffs don't even know the class just want TRO saying nobody knows what's going on

pg 27 Farquhar says he doesn't know if CBP can tell airlines what to do

goes on to say interpreting EO on their own

pg 23 M.r Farquhar is not prepared

why not just argue petition is overbroad?

in darweesh hearing, gov tried to argue stay overbroad, points out tourist visas. Court asks: can you name a single instance? argue danger to national security?

maybe similar thing here? can't make an argument on hypotheticals or something? problem is: I'm not a lawyer, dunno if Farquhar is sabotaging case (maybe to be argued by Trump) or if this is reasonably best he could do given what he had to work with. One the one hand, didn't even try to argue order overbroad (gov did that for wash case, a similar thing striking down the whole ban), on the other hand, argument of being overbroad lost for wash case. And Trump admin told DOJ nothing, and gov lawyer in sum told the court he knows nothing.



Wash case tied all these together to take down entire ban


gov would have to argue EO did not apply to LPRs (so detained by mistake) or LPRs have no due process rights on reentry (good luck).

for darweesh petition, tried to argue TRO overbroad and people not vetted extremely enough (tourists visas) a potential national security threat (not sure dunno what you could argue to say they can deport people)






problems:

no hearing for asylum before removal (darweesh)

non-LPR due process rights??

LRPs stranded


just go by wash decision to deny gov stay...


pg 22

cites case history that even non-LPRs have due process rights, dunno which apply... talks about temporarily departed non-immigrant visa holders

so point is (in text) even if doesn't apply to LPRs, still problems. Hurts likeliness to win. (and McGahn memo argument shaky)

pg 20

summarizes, states have three due process arguments:

denies re-entry to LPRs and "certiain...non-immigrant visaholders" without constitutionalyl sufficient notice and opportunity to respond.

prohibits LPRs from leaving and re-entering U.S. (remember: even if to some random country, just walk up and down to canada, applies since non-citizen from one of the 7 countries--wasn't some MIT kid flying in from London detained? another LPR out on vacation in Vienna?)

"contravenes the procedures provided by federal statute for refugees seeking asylum and related relief in the United States"


actually looking at Wash petition:

pg 9

aguring violate equal protection since basically lawful resident from 7 countries can't travel outside U.S. anymore.

pg 17

petition's due process arguments

need "notice and opportunity to be heard before denying re-entry" to LPRs or H-1B and f visas (this true?)

also "must provide due process before restricting their vital liberty interests in travelling across United States borders"

"Congress's grant of a statutory right to seek asylum or protection under the Convention Against Torture requires that the United States administer those policies and procedures consistent with due process." (doesn't say anything about being on U.S. soil? I don't get it... thought it was you can't be removed to dangerous country without hearing)






Within hours of its signing, the ban had already split families and stranded U.S. residents. Because the Trump administration ensured the ban applied to travelers in flight at the time it was signed and CBP had interpreted the ban, at least for some travelers, as applying to lawful permanent residents returning from trips overseas, hundreds of visa holders were detained at U.S. airports, a portion of these were sent back, and an "unknown number" of returning U.S. residents were left stranded.

This created immediate problems for the Trump administration: any traveler so affected would have standing to petition for a temporary restraining order on the ban, which was already on shaky constiutional grounds due to Trump's prior public statements that it was a Muslim ban. For a temporary restraining order, petitioners would have to show that the ban was harming plaintiffs and would likely be struck down once courts had time to review it. Since Trump himself had already made a compelling argument that the ban was motivated by religious animus with his public statements, and due process was not given to those detained and stranded by the ban, petitioners had strong base from which to argue the ban would likely be struck down as unconstitutional. The chaos of the ban's rollout, the large number of those injured in a legal sense, and the severity of those injuries would only bolster plaintiff's arguments that the balance of harm weighed in favor of travelers and that this harm would only continue if the ban were not stayed. 

The first petition for a restraining order came amidst the initial chaos of the ban. On Jan 28, 2017, plaintiffs filed an emergency motion to stay deportations solely due to the ban; since the ban was effective immediately, travelers from the seven listed countries who were in flight at the time had to be sent back to comply with the executive order. This included lead plaintiff Hameed Darweesh, an Iraqi citizen who had been targeted for his work as an interpreter for the U.S. army. 


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-NY-0053-0001.pdf

According to court documents, Darweesh had fled persection within his own country twice: once after police affiliated with anti-American militias searched his home, and another after he learned men he believed to be terrorists where searching for his home. Darweesh had a reason to fear for his life: two of his colleagues were killed shortly after his home was searched. Darweesh applied for an Iraqi Special Immigrant Visa (SIV), a program created by Congress to give refuge to Iraqis who faced threats due to their work for the United States. At the time the ban was signed, Darweesh had been traveling to the United States on this visa, where upon entry he was to recieve a green card in the mail.







an Iraqi who had worked for the U.S. military and believed his life would be in danger were he flown back to Iraq. Petitioners' counsel argued Darweesh and others in the same situation would face irreperable harm if the ban were allowed to continue to apply to them, as they would be deported back to some of the most dangerous countries. Those who had not yet been deported were detained at the time the emergency motion was filed.

At the same time, plaintiffs filed a petition to release the detainees. This petition argued plaintiffs had been detained unlawfully on both statutory and constitutional grounds: detainees were denied their right to apply for asylum, in violation of due process 

"Convention Against Torture" act says can't return someone to country where they would face persecuction or torture. (or USC 1231(b))

"deprived of their rights under 8 U.S.C 1231(b) ... without due process of law"



The petition for the emergency stay on removal was filed at the same time as a petition for the detainees at JFK airport to be released. By Trump's logic, these detainees 


did they also petition to release them? basically DOJ saying well maybe people on tourist visas will be let in, and could have different motivations. So I guess Trump admin would argue this damages national security by letting in people on tourist visas who haven't been "extreme vetted"

if I read right, petitioners asked for no more detentions, but order was to just prevent deporation. So the case threatened national security by Trump logic but order ultimately didn't.

significaanse of case: DOJ still looked awful in hearing, courts early on showing ban likely not to win, if it could proceed would strike down in court--and as long as these people still detained, gov can't argue the case is moot.

stay not initially clarified that it was nationwide, important since plaintiffs argued noncompliance with court order. Later ammended with LPR asking court that she won't be detained and deported on 29th. Another thing Yates would have to argue against.

for darweesh petitioned for habeaus corups and emergency motion to stay removal. habeaus corpus petition not "emergency" I guess, but argues against ban on constitutional grounds and so still existential threat to ban. According to Aziz v. Trump, its harder for aliens to sue outside u.s. soil than on u.s. soil. So not removing them (I guess) gives them better chance to win (unless LPR).

By Trump logic, a national security problem to let any of these people in, since they have not been "extreme" vetted and trump did not yet have time to "figure out what's going on."


...





https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/due_process
	An unbiased tribunal.
    Notice of the proposed action and the grounds asserted for it.
    Opportunity to present reasons why the proposed action should not be taken.
    The right to present evidence, including the right to call witnesses.
    The right to know opposing evidence.
    The right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    A decision based exclusively on the evidence presented.
    Opportunity to be represented by counsel.
    Requirement that the tribunal prepare a record of the evidence presented.
    Requirement that the tribunal prepare written findings of fact and reasons for its decision.


...


Darweesh v. Trump possible because EO affected people stuck in mid air, and admin now basically forced themselves to deport these people.


The first three notable suits were filed amidst the initial chaos of the travel ban. On Jan 28, 2017, plaintiffs filed an emergency motion to stop people who had already landed in the U.S. from being deported back to the country they flew in from due to the ban. These include lead plaintiff Hameed Darweesh, an Iraqi who had worked for the U.S. military and believed his life would be in danger were he flown back to Iraq. Petitioners' counsel argued Darweesh and others in the same situation would face irreperable harm if the ban were allowed to continue to apply to them, as they would be deported back to some of the most dangerous countries.

Since this was for a temporary stay, petitioners only had to show likliness they would win and injury to them greater than injury to opponent. Chaos of EO gave them a lot of ways to claim injury

would be up to DOJ to argue they would not suffer irreparable injury


...


Aziz for LPRs detained

lead plantiffs initial LPRs, claimed they were forced to sign away LPR status

summary of Aziz case: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/30/trump-travel-ban-yemenis-coerced-relinquish-green-card


ammended doc says Aziz bros lied to, tricked into signing away LPR and forced to be detained, ended up stranded in ethiopia

if remember right Aziz put TRO on ban for dulles, but really just made explicit can't detain or send back LPRs at dulles


DHS says this:

	We found that the lack of a public or congressional relations strategy significantly hampered CBP. For example, in Aziz v. Trump, a federal court had temporarily enjoined CBP at Dulles airport in Virginia from returning LPRs. The court had also ordered CBP to "permit lawyers access to all [LPRs] being detained at Dulles .... " CBP complied with the order not to remove LPRs and soon after the TRO issued, processed for entry the remaining five LPRs held in secondary inspection. However, CBP did not communicate that LPRs were not being denied access to lawyers either to the public or in response to Congressional inquiries, resulting in significant public protests and suspicion that CBP was not complying with a court order.


says could not remove LPRs, had to give them lawyers


Nixon Peabody LLC:

	The Aziz petitioners detail their experiences in their complaint. Although they were LPRs and had "valid entry documents," CPB prevented them from leaving IAD. Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus and Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, E.D. Va., Case No. 17-cv- 116, Dkt. 1 (Jan. 28, 2017), ¶2. CPB detained the petitioners when they arrived at IAD on the morning of Saturday, January 28, 2017. Id. at 'Irlf 25-26. They were held that entire day, without access to counsel. Id


detained for a day without lawyers


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0002.pdf

petition for TRO was on behalf of "50 to 60 Lawful Permanent Residents" detained at Dulles.

says believ they will be detained, will suffer irreparable harm if not issued TRO (doesn't Darweesh apply? maybe timing close), would lose legal rights if detained (difference for people in vs. outside U.S.)

Argues they can't understand legal rights if denied access to lawyers, have right to enter as LPRs.

so first was petition for habeaus corpus, then petitioned for lawyers to be able to visit and for them not to be removed for 7 days.

"likeliness to win" outlined in Habeaus corpus petition

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0003.pdf

lead petitioners Tarq and Ammar Aziz two brothers 19 and 21, initial LPRs, landed at IAD to see father, detained for a day without a lawyer.

lawyers ask: is there sufficient justification for them to be detained?

but basically crux of argument is: these people need lawyers, and might be legally screwed if deported, so let lawyers see them and don't deport in meantime.

Argues fifth amendent due process, establishment clause rights violated, against 1101(a)(13(c)), Rosenberg v. Fleuti

so should get right: asked for multiple things

first asked for them to be released

what happened to that?

then same day ask well at least don't deport and let them see lawyers


later on 30th new petition of habeas corpus, saying they are being bullied and tricked into giving up LPR status

Feb 3rd judge extends original TRO, orders virginia to list LPRs and visa holders detained or removed due to EO


https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0032.pdf

dude had rought life after civil war in Yemen, wanted to come to America


https://www.clearinghouse.net/detail.php?id=15595
	The plaintiffs filed an amended complaint on January 30, 2017, clarifying the class. The plaintiffs defined the class as: "individuals with legal permanent resident status or who are traveling on valid U.S. immigrant visas who have been or will be either detained and/or coerced into signing a Form I-407." The complaint asserted that CBP had refused to follow the court's TRO by claiming that the affected individuals were not in "detention," but were rather undergoing "processing." The Aziz brothers in particular had been deported and were stranded in the airport in Addis Ababa, without their passports or green cards, both of which had been confiscated. 


Aziz v Trump was one were CBP had trouble following, according to OIG report. Flagged down taxing plane to comply with order, CBP noticed from TV. Court docs say even after initial TRO Aziz bros were still deported. OIG report also says Aziz violated by "no board" issued to airplanes--did they keep Aziz bros stranded?

actually, OIG report does not specifically call out Aziz, specific for Boston case, Mohamad, and Darweesh ("serious concerns" for Darweesh)

Aziz important from waht I can see so far for two reasons: a lawful resident trying to enter U.S. from war torn country then deported is egregious (though a wrinkle as they were "initial LPRs"--returning LRPs also removed?) and shows how CBP dropping the ball and not making things easy for DOJ.

The ammended complaint and situation with Aziz brothers deported filed Jan 30, in time to be on Yates' desk (iirc Yates decision on 4:30 PM that day)

case eventually taken over by state of virginia

kept local to virginia due to Washington case


Aziz bros were initial LRPs. Any returning LPRs removed?

two ammended petitions filed on Jan 30

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0016.pdf

pg 5

	Petitioners JOHN DOES 1-60 are approximately 60 lawful permanent residents of the United States, or immigrant visa holders, all nationals of Syria, Libya, Iran, Iraq, Somalia, Yemen or Sudan, who landed at Dulles Airport on January 27 and/or 28, 2017. Upon information and belief, some of theseJohn Does were, like Tareq and Ammar, unlawfully forced to withdraw their applications for admission by means of being compelled into signing I-407 forms against their will and without their knowledge or consent, and placed on planes headed to foreign countrie


says info other LPRs forced to sign away status and sent back

footnote saying will amend with specifics as more info available

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0004.pdf

2nd doc says same thing

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0031.pdf

So they had Aziz and an F-1 student write declarations, they got screwed over, but what about returning LPRs removed? does he ever actually identify John Does like they said they would?

later

" Joint Declaration of Madeleine K. Albright, Avril D. Haines, Michael V. Hayden, John F. Kerry, John E. McLaughlin, Lisa O. Monaco, Michael J. Morell, Janet A. Napolitano, Leon E. Panetta, and Susan E. Rice [ECF# 57] "

wtf is this


Virginia ordered to list who was detained/removed and lawyers say they will identify John Does, instead they waste time and have Madeline Albright, Mike Morell, Janet Napolitano and Susan Rice come out to say how bad the ban is and politicize everything some more


is what they say good enough? it's like they're trying to make case look less credible

DHS investigation says CBP flagging down planes to comply with Aziz

OIG found DHS complied with order "soon after" TRO issued and processed for entry "the remaining five LPRs held in secondary inspection"

if it went from "50 to 60" to five, before court order, only one way that can happen... (actually no there are two ways, can still give them waivers and let them go)


so sounds credible others were deported

clearinghouse says oral args happened--maybe something in there? says before Feb 10


so OIG says DHS did good (or better) job complying with court orders on U.S. soil than abroad. Says complied with Aziz.

plaintiffs, if I read right, say CBP violated court order in removing Aziz

pg 12 deals with violations of court order

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0004.pdf

says Aziz were in fligth at time TRO was issued!

says LPRs in detention denied to see lawyers, citing daily beast article and cory booker

something off--says the detainees were given a list of lawyers to call, but weren't allowed to meet with a throng of lawyers that had gathered outside there airport with free legal services

maybe couldn't just let lawyers in without detainees asking?

article cited:

https://www.thedailybeast.com/trumps-border-agents-defy-judge-us-senator-at-dulles-airport-as-his-first-constitutional-crisis-unfolds
	At this point, it wasn’t clear how many people were detained and which of them were legal permanent residents of the U.S. Lawyers didn’t even know all the names of the people they were trying to help. It wasn’t clear if some detainees had been put back on planes returning to their countries of origin, or if detainees had been shuttled off to immigrant detention centers in Northern Virginia. The travelers were all being held in what’s called “secondary inspection,” referred to as “secondary.” It’s part of the CBP screening process where lawyers are rarely, if ever, allowed to be present.

	But lawyers who spoke to The Daily Beast said it’s also unheard of for government agencies like CBP to prevent people who have the legal right to live in the U.S. from seeing their lawyers. And that’s what was happening.

	After Brinkema’s order came down, and lawyers at Dulles prepared to meet their new clients, the CBP balked, barring these lawyers from seeing their would-be clients. 


hmm

sounds like the detainees hadn't hired these lawyers?

I think I get it

detainees free to get lawyers, but CBP not going to let the lawyers into restricted area to tell them about it

maybe CBP could have said there are these lawyers out there and you can call them (would have been nice thing to do)

but if I read right, this means CBP was mean for this case (pending facts) but did not violate court order (more on this here, says CBP did shit job of helping detainees get lawyer, informing them: https://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/trump-officials-travel-ban-234633)

	...Lawyers wrung their hands. And then, slowly, detainees started trickling out, one or two at a time. One woman who had been detained doubled over sobbing as she walked through the crowd. She nearly collapsed onto a loved one. Another man who was detained, Javad Fotouhi, calmly fielded questions from a scrum of reporters about the four hours he spent in secondary. When CBP finally let him go, he said, they didn’t say why. 


article says detainees released

but clearly some also sent back

so here could be an underhanded thing by CBP or Trump admin: between petition and order, could have rushed deporting some detainees.

In fact evidence so far says this happened: CBP were chasing planes to comply with Aziz, and Aziz bros themselves were in flight when TRO issued

not helping the DOJ


https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/public-safety/yemenese-brothers-deported-at-dulles-will-likely-be-allowed-back-into-us/2017/02/02/7daa044c-e94c-11e6-bf6f-301b6b443624_story.html?utm_term=.d252c66aa437
	Feb 2

	...Now, Virginia Attorney General Mark R. Herring (D) says they probably will be allowed into the country.

	“The government has moved quickly to make the case go away to avoid being subject to an order compelling it to produce information about its actions,” Herring’s spokesman Michael Kelly said in a statement. “They now appear to be working out some kind of arrangement with the Aziz brothers, the named plaintiffs in the suit, that would apparently ‘resolve Petitioners claims,’ presumably by getting them back into the country.”


kept them stranded out there until Yates fired

a familiar pattern...



and why, this whole time, weren't they granted relief from being detained? would have fixed the whole debacle right from the start. Cory Booker could've saved a trip.

why did media, lawyers focus on allegations of being denied right to a lawyer when lawful U.S. residents were being sent back to war torn countries...



how rushed were they in sending ppl back and how many? courts wanted to know:

https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/public-safety/va-demands-more-details-on-travel-ban-detentions-at-dulles-international-airport/2017/02/01/f10aef32-e8de-11e6-80c2-30e57e57e05d_story.html?tid=a_inl&utm_term=.e90cc2c334b7

allegations or concerns that CBP violated court order

	In the motion, Herring called on federal officials to submit sworn statements to address four key questions: The time officials received the notice of the temporary restraining order on Jan. 28; the number of air passengers that arrived at Dulles International Airport from Jan. 27, 28 and 29 with “lawful permanent residence who were removed from the United States both before and after the receipt of the actual notice” of the restraining order; whether any such arrivals were denied prompt access to counsel; and the names and titles of all government officials, if any, who instructed Customs and Border Protection personnel not to comply with the temporary restraining order.

did they ever find out?


...

darweesh


Petitioners also argued that the ban was intended to discriminate against Muslims due to the President's public statements, and so violated the equal protection and establishment clauses of the Constitution. By this, plaintiffs 



darweesh one were we have hearing for DOJ trying to argue in court

was emergency motion for stay, so for this have to argue DOJ likely to win, injuries suffered not to great

this is where court goes over "four tests," irreperable harm being key. 4 tests are: liklihood of success on merits, irreperable injury to petitioner, lielihood of injury to opposing party, and public interest. Since gov is opposiing party, liklihood of injury to them and public interest merged.

DOJ (Riley) could not assure that others who showed up could not be deported, even for the "two named plaintiffs"

says "unfolded at such speed" that "haven't had opportunity" to address legal issues

Westwater tries to say request is overbroad, court says "can you argue class won't suffer irreparable injury?"

had trouble arguing they wouldn't suffer irreperable injury

court: "I don't hear you to be arguing there's some particular risk posed by this class of people"

doj Westwater says tourists a different class, different interests

petitioner says is broad but says they've all been vetted already, and facing "real harm" because "going back to the most dangerous countries"

court asks: putting someone back on plane to syria. Irreparable harm?

Westwater: gov does not have sufficient information to have a position... require more time to have facts

court: exactly why I grant emergency stay

basically, DOJ couldn't argue they weren't suffering irreparable harm and were a danger to the U.S.


argue likely not to win on weighing damage

for likeliness not to win, point out discriminatory?

petition said violated due process rights, equal protection


why was stay granted?

almost entirely DOJ not doing well it seems

EO getting people in mid air

Trump public statements

...


Boston case




https://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/trump-officials-travel-ban-234633
	In Boston, where federal judges ordered the government to stop detaining or deporting people who would be allowed into the U.S. were it not for Trump’s executive order, CBP Watch Commander Jason Jalbert told airlines the agency would continue deporting people at Logan International Airport “where it is permissible under the law.” An Iranian scientist with an approved visa sued CBP for keeping her off a Tuesday flight from Switzerland to Boston.


more detain on violating Boston court order

	
	The CBP officers at airports were not rogue individual actors, according to the documents obtained and people interviewed by POLITICO. Rather, the agents on the ground were following orders from high in their chain of command.



goes up high in chain of command, agrees with OIG summary



...


prelude to John Doe case? stranded families?


next section:





...






led to court cases

especially boston case ended ban national security wise


Due process for returning lawful permanent residents is established by legal history and explicitly provided by immigration law.  


Because the ban was signed without warning, none of those detained, stranded, or removed from the country had 

explain how constitutional rights violated




the court cases being filed, LPRs denied constitutional rights

what DOJ is up against

why exactly are these cases unwinnable?

you can't detain someone and send them on a flight to wherever without notice and due process

...



What is known about the DHS OIG's findings partially answers some of these questions, at least how CBP interpreted it: the IG found that CBP was "was very aggressive in preventing affected travelers from boarding aircraft bound for the United States," issuing multiple "no board" orders to airlines that blocked travel for those to whom the order applied. According to a January 28th hearing, this included lawful permanent residents returning home, who were effectively stranded by the order:



...

Aziz and Boston case are LPRs detained after arriving in U.S.

alleges due process violations in petition, also talks of discrimination, establishment and equal protection violated

so making constitutional argument in case over weekend

Boston (iirc) case also has 50-60 "john doe" LPRs (might have been dulles case)

Aziz (iirc) alleges that gov sought to send back some petitioners to country they flew in from


summary of Aziz case: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/30/trump-travel-ban-yemenis-coerced-relinquish-green-card

claiims Aziz brothers forced to sign away permanent resident status and were flown out of country


Azad v. Trump has one petitioner a 78 year old woman trying to visit her grandchildren, she was sick and had to take medicine regularly and had to go to hospital while in CBP custody


in Ali v. Trump, a U.S. citizen trying to take her 6 year old into the country was (effectively) barred from entry, her kid had visas but got revoked. Actually, doesn't seem right--I think she was already in U.S., and her kid was with grandmonther in Somalia and couldn't come over due to EO

so Ali is all about U.S. citizens and LPRs who's family members wanted to come see them, they filled out all the paperwork for visas and payed fees, paid plane tickets (one more than $2k), but all were cancelled without warning by the EO.



Asili vs. DHS and Azimi vs. Trump filed jan 31, not sure if DOJ would have anticipated

Al-Mowafak Feb 2 covers students with F-1 visas


Al-Hommsi v Trump: filed for TRO (I think?) Jan 29 but no doc, medical resident barred from returning, as such great cost to him. Don't think he was LPR (didn't say), but maybe a hard case to win regardless


...

https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-VA-0004-0004.pdf

amended petition in Aziz case

claims Aziz brothers lied to, tricked/forced into signing away LPR status, and this applies to others trying to enter U.S.

they were sent back on plane, stranded in ethiopia

says they were not yet technically LPRs, but would be upon entering U.S. and handing in paperwork

says other plaintiffs, but don't know who they are??


...


https://d279m997dpfwgl.cloudfront.net/wp/2017/02/Gorton-order.pdf

another hearing on Boston case, on Jan 31 (maybe not? mentions the Feb 1 McGahn memo)

says petition ammended to include others

pg 8

says because of McGahn memo, LPR claims are moot

in one sense this is bad, since this removes need for discovery of which lawful residents were unlawfully removed, detained. Wash v Trump didn't buy mootness argument.

good to mention this: trump admin acted like it wanted to prevent discovery: withdrew EO as soon as oral arguments for for wash caes came out, McGahn memo maybe same effect, held up DHS OIG report

want to see: what case did LPRs bring against EO before Yates decision? any resident stranded (and could be a lot) would have strong case

presumably DOJ would have realized this at the time even if no litigation started by then

guess: detained and removed strongest case, stranded next strongest


...

For Boston case, gov tried to argue moot since plaintiffs were released, lawyer countered saying DOJ rep informed them that families of LPRs were detained in Egypt due to EO and could get affidavits for them.

did Church ever get these affidavits?

later (Feb 10)? gov comes with same argument that case is moot



...


CBP has ordered airlines to ban travel into U.S., including for LPRs

because ban signed immediately, travelers caught off guard. Get on plane before ban, get off after and get detained. Be about to come home, next day find you are blocked.

LPRs detained, stranded, visas denied, global chaos

This leads to lawsuits, court orders

Court cases pile up, three injunctions against ban, flights are being diverted to Boston to get around ban

It is up to DOJ to stop court orders and save "national security"

...

ban on "close hold basis" according to Kelly, only a few informed

ban had been leaked 25th, but since then CBP officers did not have opportunity to ask clarifying questions or plan implementation

CBP officers not told, get confusing directives as to how to implement, if it applies to LPRs. "caught by surprise" and confused about court orders, even basics of the ban. Conflicting directions, unclear guidance.







https://www.oig.dhs.gov/file/4678/download?token=kEDXANI_
	While CBP complied with court orders at U.S. ports of entry with travelers who had already arrived , CBP was very aggressive in preventing affected travelers from boarding aircraft bound for the United States, and took actions that, in our view, violated two separate court orders that enjoined them from this activity.    

	Specifically , from January 29, 2017 through February 3, 2017, CBP attempted to prevent Boston-bound passengers from the EO affected countries by issuing "no board" instructions to the airlines. This was in violation of an order issued by a Boston court, in *Louhghalam v. Trump*, which required CBP to notify airlines of the exact opposite - that , as a result of the court's order, the affected travelers would in effect be admissible, absent other grounds for inadmissibility, such as document fraud, since the EO could no longer form the basis of finding them inadmissible. All airlines, save one , obeyed the CBP no-board instructions. Lufthansa, citing the litigation, took the position that it would board EO-affected travelers on flights to the United States ,notwithstanding CBP's "no board" instructions. All of the EO-affected passengers on two Lufthansa flights were admitted to the United States upon arrival in Boston.   

	Additionally, CBP continued to issue "no board" instructions to airlines after a January 31, 2017 nationwide court order, *Mohammed v. United States*, enjoined CBP from blocking the entry of travelers affected by the EO .   

	Finally, while complying with the letter of the January 28, 2017 order in *Darweesh v. Trump*, we have serious concerns about CBP's actions in nevertheless issuing "no board" instructions to airlines, and denying entry to travelers at CBP's overseas preclearance facilities, in light of the court's finding that there was a strong likelihood that the EO "violated [travelers'] rights to Due Process and Equal Protection guaranteed by the United States Constitution."


"no board" orders led directly to LPRs being stranded according to court docs






...


doj has not been informed of ban:


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/30/politics/trump-travel-ban-q-and-a/
	This is the "extreme vetting" Trump promised during the campaign, but it still seems to have caught folks by surprise.

	Team Trump apparently never ran the order by officials at the Justice Department. 


http://www.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1705/19/acd.03.html
    COOPER: If the department of justice, their office of legal counsel was given a heads up so to speak about this and asked to review it, wouldn't they have given you head's up about it?

    YATES: Normally, they would. But my understanding is that they were asked not to tell us about it.

    COOPER: The department of justice's office of legal counsel was advised not to inform you specifically, the acting attorney general about this executive order.

    YATES: That's my understanding.

    COOPER: Do you know why you were not informed?

    YATES: I don't know. And I wasn't informed.

    COOPER: Is that normal procedure?

    YATES: No. First I heard of that.

    COOPER: You never heard it happening before.

    YATES: No.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	KLOBUCHAR: And during that meeting did they mention -- anyone mention that this refugee order was about to come out?

	YATES: No.

	KLOBUCHAR: Did the acting Attorney General of the United States?

	YATES: No and that was one thing that was of concern to us, is that not only was department leadership not consulted here and beyond department leadership, really the subject matter experts, the national security experts, not only was the department not consulted, we weren't even told about it. I learned about this from media reports.

...

DOJ, fed attorneys do a very bad job of defending against these orders in court

they aren't getting much help from Trump admin

some try to argue: maybe court order not necessary, maybe gov can sort it out, maybe it doesn't really apply to LPRs

CPB orders airlines to ban travel in defiance of court orders brought for stranded LPRs.

courts (boston decision) challenge ban on constitutional grounds: due process and religious discrimination

...

turns out it is a Muslim ban

this is unconstitutional

established by Trump's public statements, text of EO

"well established" courts look at surrounding evidence to determine intent of order

Trump is aware a Muslim ban is unconstitutional, even as he makes statements that add to evidence that it is a Muslim ban

ban is legally doomed

but doom comes early

...

Trump and his surrogates are still making public statements that establish it's a Muslim ban


prioritizing christians had impact, makes problems:


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-immigration-iraq-minorities/trump-travel-ban-leaves-iraqs-persecuted-yazidis-in-limbo-idUSKBN15E1E9
	The order said “religious minorities facing persecution in their countries” would be given priority when refugee admissions resume.

	More than one hundred Yazidis are waiting for their IOM asylum applications to be processed, Saib Khidr, a prominent Yazidi lawyer and human rights activist close to the Baba Sheikh, the top religious leader of the community.

	A Yazidi woman was denied boarding a flight to the United States on Sunday, he said.

	Khidr said he had hoped Yazidis would be among those given priority but was concerned that Trump only mentioned the persecution of Syrian Christians when asked about the issue in an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network.

	“We’re disappointed,” he told Reuters in Baghdad. “We’re waiting for the American side to clarify its position.” 

[by same logic that bad dudes might rush in, would bad dudes rush to hurt/kill persecuted minorities while refugee program completely suspended?]


So EO basically over at this point. DOJ look like idiots, probably unhappy at this point, legal battle is stacked against them.

Yates meets with lawyers that Monday. Lawyers tired, humiliated. The state of Washington had just filed a complaint saying the whole EO is unconstitutional. Someone tells Yates she has to make a judgement on the order's constitutionality by Monday...


...






------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/30/politics/trump-travel-ban-q-and-a/
	It was a wild couple of days of chaos and confusion after President Trump signed his travel ban. Not up to speed on what went down over the weekend? Here's a quick primer.

	What happened?






------




https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf
	...Although we agree that “the Government’s interest in combating terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order,” Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project , 561 U.S. 1, 28 (2010), the Government has done little more than reiterate that fact. Despite the district court’s and our own repeated invitations to explain the urgent need for the Executive Order to be placed immediately into effect, the Government submitted no evidence to rebut the States’ argument that the district court’s order merely returned the nation temporarily to the position it has occupied for many previous years.



https://www.facebook.com/DonaldTrump/posts/10158567643610725
	Jan 29

	We will keep it free and keep it safe, as the media knows, but refuses to say. My policy is similar to what President Obama did in 2011 when he banned visas for refugees from Iraq for six months. The seven countries named in the Executive Order are the same countries previously identified by the Obama administration as sources of terror. To be clear, this is not a Muslim ban, as the media is falsely reporting. 


Trump knows something like his EO can pass, and knows "partisan" judges will be up against him. He's no stranger to courts.

He appears to believe all Obama appointees out to get him.

So he knows he's up for a tough battle against courts.

So here's an alibi for not keeping Yates in the loop: he thinks she will collude with courts, not defend his ban, or try to sabotage the whole thing.

In this case, the obvious thing to do is to wait for AG to be installed, go ahead.

Otherwise, anyone can predict what would happen: the ban would lose in court, and Trump would have "shown his hand" to these dangerous terrorists.

The Democrats in Congress have been delaying his pick for AG

Trump might think, how am I going to get this ban out there then? will I have to wait until Congress gives me an AG?

so he decides to do the ban anyway, without informing the DOJ, most of the DHS...

but he has to expect the ban will fail, and show his hand--it's a stupid move.

So what is motivation?

Only thing he would get out of it that is clear is that it will give him a shot at firing AG and getting "his people in." This is an immediate problem for Trump one way or another.

And, in fact, making it obvious to court it's a Muslim ban and expediating litigation makes that happen.

And so this is the same argument as before, but with a different motivation: to clear an AG he thinks is undermining his travel ban, or in general.

This doesn't help Trump much, but shift in motive means can argue not provably guilty of obstruction of Justice, but maybe abuse of power (global chaos to get rid of AG).

It's hard to think of any other motive for sending out an obvious Muslim ban to a legal battle he knows he'll lose (apparently thinks both legal defense and offense against him). But could be... would have to be creative?


------


use the Arpiao case as an example of why due process should apply to illegal residents



------


here's a Trump alibi:

Trump never intended to inform Yates or other DOJ and DHS officials about the ban. He didn't trust them, and thought they'd leak it, collude with courts, give bad advice, or otherwise undermine him. Yates warning about Flynn only bolstered this suspicion. He really wanted to wait for Sessions, who's confirmation Democrat congressmen were delaying.

But the leak forced his hand. After the leak, Trump knew he had to enact the ban soon--bad dudes would be rushing into the country the whole time. At the same time, Trump was unprepared to roll out the travel ban since he was waiting for Jeff Sessions. But he decided to do it anyway--a "hail mary" pass. It was either that or suffer the delays of Democrats in Congress while hoards of Muslim terrorists pour into the country.

The confusion and LPRs getting detained--which led immediately to court cases that shut down the ban--were not his intention. In fact, they might have been plots from Obama appointees and the Muslim brotherhood trying to undermine him. And, by all accounts, this plot to undermine Trump's travel ban succeeded: travelers were wrongly detained, and the courts shut down the ban almost immediately.

Trump saw the awful performance of the DOJ defending the ban in courts and knew that everything he predicted was right: the political Obama DOJ was trying to sabotage his ban. It was then that he knew what he had to do: fire acting Attorney General Sally Yates. Then, if he were able to install someone loyal who truly understands the Muslim threat, he might have time to salvage the ban and close the spigot of the terrorist hoards.

But it was not enough: the slow and political courts were still able to prevail; the Muslim Brotherhood/ACLU's joint efforts to destroy his ban had already taken their toll.


...


for this to work, have to answer some questions:

why all these things, by Trump himself, that seem to undermine his own ban? Putting the bit on religious persecution in there, his public statement on that, public statements implying it's a muslim ban. Applying to LPRs in the first place. Would these be part of some grand plot to undermine him too? (well kindof? possibly? but by what would he argue that? possible it was a plot to make the ban fail in court, but for a different reason...)

Why did it take so long to "clarify" that the EO didn't apply to LPRs? Took McGahn 3 days, and courts were not convinced this was strong enough as an official executive position. We are assuming this is crisis mode for the President, why not see what's going on and act fast to clarify confusion about the EO? even a public statement by the president. Instead, while all this is going on, Trump is saying the ban is "going great." Trump would have to argue he was grossly misinformed on what was actually happening with the ban (how much was he informed?).

And why did it take so long to put out a fixed EO? It was a month later. He waited until oral arguments against 1st ban came out to drop it. This itself might undermine Trump's position that things were urgent and he had to act quickly--why would it take so long to write a fixed EO? (should look into. Also important is for what period of time was original ban actually in effect?)

Also should look at differences between 1st and 2nd EO, maybe understand what was up with Iraq ban, something which apparently undermined his ban as well (soldiers denied entry to U.S.).

And even second travel ban didn't pass courts for similar reasons. Was it really not until recently that he figured out he could just have a proclimation to include NK and Chad and fix everything? if travel from those countries should be banned, why wasn't that in the original EO?

Second travel ban also had 10 days notice. Apparently he gave up on the "bad dudes rushing in" theory. Would have to argue he decided it was too late by then I guess. Still begs question of why not try some kind of fix to EO sooner.

And, assuming his hand was forced and made a "hail mary pass," why not prepare better for that? If he actually wanted the ban to win in court, there are a lot of things he could have done differently (get DOJ he had informed and prepared at minimum, even ask Yates to step down if he thinks she won't defend honestly, change to get something less than what he wanted out there to at least pass courts, have a better rollout were at least CBP were informed and could ask clarifying questions, which should not have been an issue after the leak). He would basically have to argue incompetence or that all of these things were part of a plot against him.

He waited two days after leak to do the ban--what did he do to prepare in those two days? 



Another problem with "forced hand/hail mary" defense: if that's true, why go on David Muir and confirm everything...

would have to be this: some time between 25th and 27th, Trump suddenly changed his mind and realized that he had to implement the EO immediately to stop the bad dudes

then, apparently later, he decided that this wasn't such a big deal after all since "vetting tougher than ever before" (Sheriffs interview, says better vetting plan to fight in court)

so the defense is that Trump is an idiot


so can conclude I think pretty soundly that that Trump never cared about the "bad dudes thing:"

announced during campaign

confirmed leaks on david Muir

pins it all on Kelly who says he wasn't even involved

takes time to defend original ban in court, a month to bring in later ban

explains decision to fight in court that he decided we have "more extreme vetting" procedures now, has decided its not a big deal after all


which leaves question: why did Trump do the expediated rollout in the first place?


...


https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/02/05/513548211/with-trumps-travel-ban-blocked-visa-holders-refugees-scramble-to-board-flights
	With Trump's Travel Ban Blocked, Visa Holders, Refugees Scramble to Board Flights


shows that by Trump's logic, losing in court led to exactly effect he claimed he feared


...



https://www.oig.dhs.gov/file/4678/download?token=kEDXANI_
	At the ports of entry, CBP largely complied with the court orders. We found some delay and confusion as to the scope of some of the orders. For example, CBPOs in Los Angeles discovered the existence of one of the early court orders, *Darweesh v. Trump*, by watching television, but did not receive immediate guidance, so continued returning affected travelers. However, we believe that CBP at the ports of entry attempted in good faith to obey court orders. In fact, we found evidence that at some ports, CBP went to extraordinary lengths to comply . For example, at Dulles, to comply with a court order in *Aziz v. Trump*, CBP managed to recall a taxiing aircraft that was about to depart with a denied traveler on board, so she could be admitted.




https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-MA-0007-0004.pdf
	HAMEED KHALID DARWEESH, et al., Plaintiffs, - versus - DONALD TRUMP, et al., Defendants

	...MS. CHURCH: ...Your Honor, we do know of at least one junior at MIT who's been in contact with us who attempted to board a plane, I believe in London -- I've talked to a lot of people today, so I'm not totally positive about the location -- who was denied.

	...A representative of the Attorney General's Office has told us that there are families currently in Egypt who all are lawful permanent residents who are all -- local Boston residents who were all sent back and not allowed to board a plane.

	...We don't know the exact details, but we've been told that the airlines are not allowing it based on the executive order.

	...And those are my two examples. I'm tracking through national immigration lawyers thousands of examples. I mean, it's happening all over the world



-----

did he actually believe the ban would pass?

not the point

Knew there were legal problems with his proposal, tried to address them in public statements, and so can infer (I think?) he knew there would be a legal fight.

OR: Either knew there would be legal fight about ban or is a complete idiot


alibi for him: he knew there would be a legal fight but thought he had it in the bag and would win?

did he know about due process concerns? was in media

says doesn't apply to people living in the country, yet he applies it to them

so can't say for sure if he was thinking about a legal fight specifically on due process, but he did think about the problem and had a solution--if you live here, you can come back. But for some reason doesn't do that




...





https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2017/06/11/what-president-trump-has-said-about-muslims-travel-ban/102565166/
    ...Jan. 27, 2017

    Trump before signing the first travel ban during a ceremony at the Pentagon:

        "This is the ‘Protection of the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States.’ We all know what that means."



at some point, it morphs into something involving territories

he knows this is unconsitutional, will face legal problems, has ran by his "experts" according to Guliani

and he believes partisan judges stacked against him

by Trump logic: this is big legal challenge up ahead for Trump. Can he get his ban, which people have said is unconstitutional, passed through potentially hostile courts?


...


------



do everything in their power to tip the scales in their favor in likliness to win and balance of harm. 

...


any of these problems were forseeable, any can ask for TRO on ban (courts don't have to rewrite statues) (and I guess shouldn't due to separation of powers?) which can be granted in a matter of hours after filing (Louhghalam basically and Mohammad)

turns out, gov has an argument that can help stop a TRO

for stranding LPRs, had policy of letting them in, in emails

for Muslim ban? all Trump said was "not a Muslim ban"




...


what admin would have to do:


limit chaos, basically be able to make an argument in court that harm wouldn't continue (e.g. opposing lawyer says "we have more landing tomorrow who will be barred from flying, need TRO" can point to guidance to airlines saying let LPRs in)

(admitting that problems caused by witholding EO until last minute, and so rough rollout would probably help)

settle cases fast--release detainees, let back in people stranded (didn't do this for Asalis, actually violated Darweesh court order, brought on behalf of U.S. citizen brother)

argue cases moot, isolated incidents due to mistakes

things happenening fast, would need to make sure DOJ on the ball




https://www.clearinghouse.net/chDocs/public/IM-CA-0087-0001.pdf

this explains test for TRO






https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/28/airports-us-immigration-ban-muslim-countries-trump
    Overseas, airport officials appeared to err on the side of blocking passengers from listed countries. It was reported, for example, that seven people, being escorted by officials from the United Nations refugee agency, were prevented from boarding a flight from Egypt to New York after authorities in Cairo contacted their counterparts at JFK. Air Canada had reportedly advised people from the seven countries concerned not to board flights to the US, whether or not they held a green card.


https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/feb/03/trump-travel-ban-dubai-airline
    Turning people away was heart-wrenching; my colleagues and I were in disbelief. For instance, one Syrian woman with a green card – who had lived in the US for decades – was turned away due to the order. We also couldn’t send her to 95% of our destinations as she holds a Syrian passport, which left her stuck in the airport for 48 hours – even Dubai does not allow Syrians to enter without a visa.





------




last part (sum all up) should be: why the constitution is important...