

http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/British_Empire
	The British Empire is the most extensive empire in world history and for a time was the foremost global power. It was a product of the European age of discovery, which began with the global maritime explorations of Portugal and Spain in the late fifteenth century.

	By 1921, the British Empire ruled a population of between 470 and 570 million people, approximately one-quarter of the world's population. It covered about 14.3 million square miles (more than 37 million square kilometers), about a quarter of Earth's total land area. Though it has now mostly evolved into the Commonwealth of Nations, British influence remains strong throughout the world: in economic practice, legal and governmental systems, sports (such as cricket and football), and the English language itself.

	The British Empire was, at one time, referred to as "the empire on which the sun never sets" (a phrase previously used to describe the Spanish Empire and later to American influence in the world) because the empire's span across the globe ensured that the sun was always shining on at least one of its numerous colonies. On the one hand, the British developed a sense of their own destiny and moral responsibility in the world, believing that many of her colonial subjects required guidance, that it was British rule that prevented anarchy and chaos. Positively, the education system sponsored by the British promulgated an awareness of such values as freedom, human dignity, equality—even though those taught often observed that their colonial masters did not practice what they preached. Negatively, peoples and resources were exploited at Britain's advantage and more often than not at the cost of her overseas possessions.


why did this keep happening in British empire

Lord North made a bunch of decicions where it seemed like it would be obvious it would galvanize American patriots, and I think similar things happened during rise of Communism.

could be stupidity and arrogance, could be wanting to start a revolution to crush it later (1848 revolutions come off that way), or could be wanted the revolutions to happen


	Many British thought their ascendancy providential, part of the divine plan. Anyone who believes that history is not merely a series of accidents might well see God's hand behind the creation of an empire that, despite all the ills of an imperial system imposed on unwilling subjects, also left a cultural, literary, legal and political legacy that binds people of different religions and races together.


did John Dee think that? he is weird

goes on about merchant marine and improving royal navy, I guess making them suited for a large overseas empire


	... Ireland

	The first substantial achievements of the colonial empire stem from the Act for Kingly Title, passed by the Irish parliament in 1541. This statute converted Ireland from a lordship under the authority of the English crown to a kingdom in its own right. It was the starting point for the Tudor re-conquest of Ireland.

	By 1550 a committed policy of colonization of the country had been adopted, which culminated in the Plantation of Ulster in 1610, following the Nine Years War (1595-1603). These plantations would serve as templates for the empire. Several people involved in these projects also had a hand in the early colonization of North America, including Humphrey Walter Raleigh and Francis Drake. The Plantations were large tracts of land granted to English and Scottish settlers, many of whom enjoyed newly created titles.


http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Francis_Drake
	Sir Francis Drake, Vice Admiral, (c. 1540 – January 28 1596) was a pre-eminent English navigator, politician, civil engineer, and known slave trader, of the Elizabethan age. He became the first Englishman to circumnavigate the globe, and the second circumnavigation of the world in a single expedition, from 1577 to 1580. Queen Elizabeth thought very highly of him and appointed him second-in-command of the English fleet that sailed against the Spanish Armada in 1588.

	Although he was famous for his courage in battle, he was not liked by some of his peers. His legendary exploits made him a hero among the English but to the Spaniards he was equated with the devil himself. He was known as "El Dragón" for his actions. King Philip II placed a bounty on Drake's head of 20,000 ducats; about 10 million US dollars.

	Drake's exploits made a significant contribution to the birth of what became the British Empire, as Elizabeth turned her attention away from ambitions in Europe towards the Americas and beyond, where her colony of Virginia was established. Drake's activities thus set the stage for Elizabeth's subjects to settle in North America, where they brought with them notions of religious liberty, of civil society composed of voluntary associations, out of which would arise American democracy.


goes on about circumventing world, landing in California and making small colony, fighting Spanish and sacking a port in Florida

	
	...Drake and Sir John Hawkins made the first English slave-trading expeditions, making his fortune through the sale of West Africans. Around 1563 Drake first sailed west to the Spanish Main, on a ship owned by his uncle John Hawkins, with a cargo of people forcibly removed from the coast of West Africa. Drake planned to sell the Africans into slavery in Spanish plantations. But Drake took an immediate dislike to the Spanish, at least in part due to their Catholicism and inherent mistrust of non-Spaniards. His hostility is said to have increased over an incident at San Juan de Ulua in 1568, when, while delivering his human cargo, a Spanish fleet took him by surprise. Although he was in an enemy port, it was conventional for the Spanish to 'surrender' for a few hours in order to purchase control of the kidnap victims. Thus, it was unusual for a fleet of enemy warships to appear out of the blue. Drake survived the attack largely because of his ability to swim. From then on, he devoted his life to working against the Spanish Empire; the Spanish considered him an outlaw pirate, but to England he was simply a sailor and privateer. On his second such voyage, he fought a battle against Spanish forces that cost many English lives but earned him the favor of Queen Elizabeth.


pioneered British slave trade and sold them to Spanish, even though fighting with them. Would "surrender" to him just to buy slaves


	... Legacy

	Drake's exploits as an explorer have become an irrevocable part of the world's subconsciousness, particularly in Europe. Numerous stories and fictional adaptations of his adventures exist to this day. Considered a hero in England, it is said that if England is ever in peril, beating Drake's Drum will cause Drake to return to save the country. This is a variation of the sleeping hero folk-tale.

	During his circumnavigation of the globe, Drake left a plate upon leaving his landing place on the west coast of North America, claiming the land for England. In the 1930s, it appeared that Drake's plate had been found near San Francisco. Forty years later, scientists confirmed that the plate was a hoax, as had been suspected. Later information attributed the hoax to E Clampus Vitus.

	Drake's adventures, though less known in the United States, still have some effect. For instance, a major east-west road in Marin County, California is named Sir Francis Drake Boulevard. It connects Point San Quentin on San Francisco Bay with Point Reyes and Drakes Bay. Each end is near a site considered by some to be Drake's landing place.


legends and hoaxes about him came about, made out to be hero of England



https://www.history.com/news/10-things-you-may-not-know-about-francis-drake

was secretly working as pirate for Elizabeth I for his around the world voyage

slave trade or the way he did it to Spanish colonies was illegal and that's how he got attacked by them and hated Spanish

helped escaped slaves who hated spanish in pirate mission looting them

later became MP and mayor of plymouth

became admiral and helped destory spanish armada

among spanish there were rumors of him having satanic powers which made him more feared


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavery_in_Britain


John Hawkins Drake's cousin, who got him into slave trade, said to be "pioneer of the English Slave Trade"

	...According to the Domesday Book census, over 10% of England's population in 1086 were slaves.[14] In 1102, the Church Council of London convened by Anselm issued a decree: "Let no one dare hereafter to engage in the infamous business, prevalent in England, of selling men like animals."[15] However, the Council had no legislative powers, and no act of law was valid unless signed by the monarch.

	The influence of the new Norman aristocracy led to the decline of slavery in England. Contemporary writers noted that the Scottish and Welsh took captives as slaves during raids, a practice which was no longer common in England by the 12th century. However, by the start of the 13th century references to people being taken as slave stopped. While there was no legislation against slavery in Ireland and Wales,[16] William the Conqueror introduced a law preventing the sale of slaves overseas.[17] According to historian John Gillingham, by about 1200 slavery in the British Isles was non-existent.[16]


did someone bring it back? why would you do that...



------


http://www.nbcnews.com/id/18710078/ns/us_news-crime_and_courts/t/ny-millionaires-arrested-alleged-slavery/
	MINEOLA, N.Y. — A millionaire couple was arrested on federal charges that they kept two Indonesian women as slaves in their swank Long Island home for more than five years, beating and abusing them and paying them almost nothing.

	Authorities uncovered the alleged abuse after one of the women was found by police wandering outside a doughnut shop Sunday morning wearing only pants and a towel.

	The homeowners, Varsha Mahender Sabhnani, 35, and her husband, Mahender Murlidhar Sabhnani, 51, entered not guilty pleas Tuesday at their arraignment in U.S. District Court in Central Islip and were ordered held pending a Thursday bail hearing.

	Prosecutors said the women had scalding water thrown on them and were forced to repeatedly climb up and down stairs and take as many as 30 showers in three hours — all as punishment for perceived misdeeds. In one case, prosecutors said, one woman was forced to eat 25 hot chili peppers at a time.

	One woman told authorities she was cut behind her ears with a pocket knife and both were forced to sleep on mats in the kitchen. They were fed so little, they claimed, they were forced to steal food and hide it from their captors.

	...A federal complaint alleged the couple, who live in East Muttontown, a tony community on Long Island's north shore, kept the two women in their home as domestic servants, barring them from leaving the house for any reason other than to take trash to the curb. The couple ran a perfume business out of their multimillion-dollar home and have factories in Asia, authorities said.

	They also have a residence in Manhattan and $1.8 million in the bank, prosecutors said.

	The two women, identified in court papers as Samirah and Nona, said they were promised payments of $200 and $100 a month, but federal prosecutors said they were never given money directly. One of the victims' daughters living in Indonesia was sent $100 a month, prosecutors said.



a millionaire could afford a maid and you'd think they'd realize this would get them arrested

what was the motive for this?


http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/05/25/AR2007052500650.html
	Bribery Claimed in NY Slave Labor case

	By FRANK ELTMAN
	The Associated Press
	Friday, May 25, 2007; 10:52 AM

	 CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y. -- The mother of a woman accused of keeping two Indonesian women as slaves tried to bribe a victim's relative to make the case go away, prosecutors said.

	The accused woman, Varsha Mahender Sabhnani, and her husband, Mahender Murlidhar Sabhnani, were being held in jail on Friday, a day after the new charges arose at their arraignment.

	The millionaire couple _ who operate a worldwide perfume business out of their Long Island home _ pleaded not guilty to federal slavery charges.

	They were arrested last week after one of the servants, wearing only pants and a towel, was found wandering outside a doughnut shop in Syosset, on the region's so-called Gold Coast. Authorities concluded she escaped the Sabhnanis' nearby Muttontown home when she took out the trash. 

	Unable to speak English fluently, she showed her wounds and Indonesian passport to a shop worker and said, "Mister, mister, I want to go home _ Indonesia," said Indonesian Foreign Ministry spokesman Kristiarto Legowo. 

	Prosecutors said Thursday that Varsha Sabhnani's mother, who lives in Indonesia, tried to make the case go away by bribing a son-in-law of one of the servants with the equivalent of $2,500. They also said Varsha Sabhnani had earlier told the other victim that her husband, who still lives in Indonesia, would be arrested unless she followed orders. 

	... Defense lawyers have denied that the workers were abused or held against their will. They were disappointed by the new allegations but said they would be withdrawn or proven to be false. 


mother tried to bribe relative of victim with $2,500, was revealed in the middle of case proceedings


https://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/23/nyregion/23slave.html
	By ERIC KONIGSBERG JUNE 23, 2008

	MUTTONTOWN, N.Y. — With their courtship complete and their arranged marriage only a few weeks old, Mahender and Varsha Sabhnani set out for New York from India in 1981, leaving behind their wealthy families and households with live-in servants.

	By American standards, they did not have much money. But they started a perfume company and embarked on a typical exurban migration — from Queens to Hicksville to Muttontown, where they moved into Muttontown Knolls, a new subdivision of 88 half-acre plots that offered three models of houses.

	Theirs was a modern Long Island chalet: about 5,900 square feet, with diagonal cedar siding, a sharply sloping roof and two bronze lions standing guard before their front stoop.

	Working from home and selling fortified-strength fragrances to customers in the Middle East and Southeast Asia, the Sabhnanis made millions. “It started in our basement and just kind of grew from there,” said Pooja Sabhnani, 23, the oldest of their four children. “My parents worked incredibly hard.”


perps moved to U.S., started perform business selling to middle east and southeast asia in basement and made millions

	
	Eventually, they brought servants from Indonesia, where Varsha Sabhnani had been raised. On May 13, 2007, the police were called to a Dunkin’ Donuts in Syosset, N.Y., where one of the domestic workers had turned up. Her face was bruised and she wore only pants and a towel.

	When the Dunkin’ Donuts employees tried to talk to the 51-year-old woman, identified as Samirah — like many Indonesians, she uses only one name — she made gestures of hitting herself and uttered what sounded to them like the word “master.”


did they make her call them "master?"


	...Last month, a judge reprimanded Mr. Sabhnani and the security firm that was guarding him for violating the terms of his confinement by allowing him to attend business dinners in Manhattan that kept him out past 1 a.m.


security firm gaurding him let him attend late business dinners and was reprimanded by judge.


	...The Sabhnanis’ lawyers managed to get their sentencing dates pushed back several times, but on Friday, Pooja Sabhnani said she was resigned to prison terms for her parents. “For months, we tried not to talk about the sentencing, but you kind of have to talk about it now,” she said, adding that she, her father and her siblings have taken turns visiting her mother four days a week at the Nassau County Correctional Center. “We’re trying to prepare to take hold of the business ourselves.”

	The Sabhnanis maintain that they are innocent, and plan to appeal. In court, their lawyers tried to portray the domestic workers’ claims as fabrications hatched to extort money from the family or to gain American citizenship.

	A Picture of Success

	The trial testimony and interviews with relatives, friends and business colleagues of the couple detail a spectacular fall for the family, which appeared to be the very picture of upper-middle-class industry, success and acquisition.

	“This case is very frightening for Indian families here,” said Bharat Jotwani, a wealthy friend of the Sabhnanis’ who lives nearby. “We are all educated, nice people. We came here to make it.”


NY Times seems to emphasize perps family, success and fall from grace (should compare to other coverage). Have a hunch them having slaves has nothing to do with them being Indian


article goes on to say perp family parents were wealthy, Mr. Sabhnani's Uncle had an import-export business that he worked for before starting perfume business.


	...For the workers, America was supposed to be a rung up on the ladder from their previous postings — with higher wages and better conditions. Samirah’s husband left her when she was pregnant with their fifth child, the prosecutors said. She had worked for a family in Saudi Arabia, and was last employed in Jakarta selling rice at a factory.

	Enung has been married three times — the first when she was 14 — and has raised nine children. She was educated until about the equivalent of the first grade, and was pulled out because, she testified, her family could not afford to have her in school. She has worked since she was 7.

	Dilip Ratha, an economist at the World Bank who has studied migration patterns of laborers from the developing world, said the case fit a common template for the many workers who leave countries like Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia for wealthier nations so that they can send their earnings home to their families.

	“Such arrangements are not uncommon, and even though there has been a good deal of government regulation of guest-worker programs in some places, some of these patterns of financial abuse have been institutionalized by now,” he said.


victims said to have been in some kind of network for domestic laborers

is NY times calling them "domestic workers" victims of "financial abuse?"

in text of article, only appearence of word "slave" is "Speaking through an interpreter, the two women described for authorities an existence on Long Island that sounded very much like slave labor. They spoke of starvation, beatings and torture."

go over torture and abuse of victims:


	While they were working on Long Island, Samirah and Enung were typically paid by Mrs. Sabhnani’s mother through transactions in Jakarta, said Mark Lesko, the assistant United States attorney who tried the case. Samirah’s compensation, for example, went directly to her daughter from Mrs. Joti. The trial testimony painted the Sabhnani household dynamic as less upstairs-downstairs than a case of third world feudalism transposed to Long Island.


what does this mean?


	The jurors were repeatedly moved to tears. Samirah and Enung, who are staying in the United States on visas for trafficking victims and are living in a group home, told of being cut with a knife and burned with boiling water. Samirah said she was forced to eat bunches of hot chili peppers and spoonfuls of chili powder until she vomited. Then, she was made to eat her own vomit.

	‘I Was Beaten Up’

	In a locked cabinet in a closet off the master bedroom, investigators found a photo of Samirah drinking milk from a carton. At trial, Samirah explained that one day she had not been permitted to eat by 3 p.m. — the workers testified that they were sometimes starved and often ate out of the garbage — so she took a sip of milk from the refrigerator. One of the Sabhnanis’ daughters, Dakshina, saw her.

	“And Dakshina told the mother, ‘Samirah took milk without using a glass,’ ” Samirah testified. “And immediately I was beaten up by the missus.”

	Mrs. Sabhnani gathered the children to watch as Samirah was forced to recreate her transgression for the camera. If she ever “stole” food again, she was told, her children would receive the photograph. “And then my children would be embarrassed that the mother was the thief,” Samirah said.


Samirah cut, burned, humiliated by perps


here's an explanation for motive:


https://psychology.stackexchange.com/questions/4380/sadistic-personality-disorder-psychopathy-and-correlation-with-violence
	This narcissistic need for an audience manifests itself in other circumstances. Sadists strive to humiliate people in front of witnesses. This makes them feel omnipotent. Power plays are important to them and they are likely to treat people under their control or entrusted to their care harshly: a subordinate, a child, a student, a prisoner, a patient, or a spouse are all liable to suffer the consequences of the sadist's "control freakery" and exacting "disciplinary" measures.

	Sadists like to inflict pain because they find suffering, both corporeal and psychological, amusing. They torture animals and people because, to them, the sights and sounds of a creature writhing in agony are hilarious and pleasurable. Sadists go to great lengths to hurt others: they lie, deceive, commit crimes, and even make personal sacrifices merely so as to enjoy the cathartic moment of witnessing someone else's misery.


https://www.psychologicalscience.org/news/releases/everyday-sadists-take-pleasure-in-others-pain.html
	Most of the time, we try to avoid inflicting pain on others — when we do hurt someone, we typically experience guilt, remorse, or other feelings of distress. But for some, cruelty can be pleasurable, even exciting. New research suggests that this kind of everyday sadism is real and more common than we might think.

	Two studies led by psychological scientist Erin Buckels of the University of British Columbia revealed that people who score high on a measure of sadism seem to derive pleasure from behaviors that hurt others, and are even willing to expend extra effort to make someone else suffer.

	...“Some find it hard to reconcile sadism with the concept of ‘normal’ psychological functioning, but our findings show that sadistic tendencies among otherwise well-adjusted people must be acknowledged,” says Buckels.  “These people aren’t necessarily serial killers or sexual deviants but they gain some emotional benefit in causing or simply observing others’ suffering.”

	Based on their previous work on the “Dark Triad” of personality, Buckels and colleagues Delroy Paulhus of the University of British Columbia and Daniel Jones of the University of Texas El Paso surmised that sadism is a distinct aspect of personality that joins with three others — psychopathy, narcissism, and Machiavellianism — to form a “Dark Tetrad” of personality traits.

	To test their hypothesis, they decided to examine everyday sadism under controlled laboratory conditions. They recruited 71 participants to take part in a study on “personality and tolerance for challenging jobs.” Participants were asked to choose among several unpleasant tasks: killing bugs, helping the experimenter kill bugs, cleaning dirty toilets, or enduring pain from ice water.

	Participants who chose bug killing were shown the bug-crunching machine: a modified coffee grinder that produced a distinct crunching sound so as to maximize the gruesomeness of the task. Nearby were cups containing live pill bugs, each cup labeled with the bug’s name: Muffin, Ike, and Tootsie.

	The participant’s job was to drop the bugs into the machine, force down the cover, and “grind them up.” The participants didn’t know that a barrier actually prevented the bugs from being ground up and that no bugs were harmed in the experiment.

	Of the 71 participants, 12.7% chose the pain-tolerance task, 33.8% chose the toilet-cleaning task, 26.8% chose to help kill bugs, and 26.8% chose to kill bugs.

	Participants who chose bug killing had the highest scores on a scale measuring sadistic impulses, just as the researchers predicted. The more sadistic the participant was, the more likely he or she was to choose bug killing over the other options, even when their scores on Dark Triad measures, fear of bugs, and sensitivity to disgust were taken into account.

	Participants with high levels of sadism who chose to kill bugs reported taking significantly greater pleasure in the task than those who chose another task, and their pleasure seemed to correlate with the number of bugs they killed, suggesting that sadistic behavior may hold some sort of reward value for those participants.

	And a second study revealed that, of the participants who rated high on one of the “dark” personality traits, only sadists chose to intensify blasts of white noise directed at an innocent opponent when they realized the opponent wouldn’t fight back. They were also the only ones willing to expend additional time and energy to be able to blast the innocent opponent with the noise.


hmmm


	Together, these results suggest that sadists possess an intrinsic motivation to inflict suffering on innocent others, even at a personal cost — a motivation that is absent from the other dark personality traits.

	The researchers hope that these new findings will help to broaden people’s view of sadism as an aspect of personality that manifests in everyday life, helping to dispel the notion that sadism is limited to sexual deviants and criminals.

	Buckels and colleagues are continuing to investigate everyday sadism, including its role in online trolling behavior.

	“Trolling culture is unique in that it explicitly celebrates sadistic pleasure, or ‘lulz,’” says Buckels. “It is, perhaps, not surprising then that sadists gravitate toward those activities.”

	And they’re also exploring vicarious forms of sadism, such as enjoying cruelty in movies, video games, and sports.

	The researchers believe their findings have the potential to inform research and policy on domestic abuse, bullying, animal abuse, and cases of military and police brutality.

	“It is such situations that sadistic individuals may exploit for personal pleasure,” says Buckels. “Denying the dark side of personality will not help when managing people in these contexts.”



https://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/23/nyregion/23slave.html
	...Law enforcement officials involved in the case theorized that some of Mrs. Sabhnani’s behavior may have stemmed from her own complicated relationship with food. She had been extremely overweight most of her adult life. Then, three years ago, she went on a diet that brought her weight down to less than 150 from more than 300 pounds.


reminiscent of "my childhood made my do it" defense popularized in Leopold and Loeb case

at least NY Times seems better now than 1920s (a little)


	...“They were like a part of our family,” she said of Samirah and Enung. “They knew when you were sick and when you were well.”

	She said that when she and her family traveled to Indonesia on vacation — the Sabhnanis usually took a two-month trip abroad in the summer, leaving the workers at home — they looked up one of Samirah’s daughters.

	She said of the workers, “We got them Christmas presents. I got them sneakers from K-Mart. They said we didn’t give them winter coats. They had coats.”

	She continued: “They said we never brought them out. We took them out in the snow. We took their picture and explained to them, ‘We are taking your picture. When you go back, you’ll get this picture. We’ll give the picture to you, and you can bring it home so you can show your children that you saw snow.’ ”

	The family’s closest friends are fellow Hindu Sindhis on Long Island who have been taken aback by the charges.

	When one of them, Mr. Jotwani defended the Sabhnanis, he sounded as though he felt impelled to defend his entire community.

	“There is no way on earth any Indian family in the United States could do what they were accused of,” he said. “The [Indian] people I know here all feel this way. Anybody from India who has come here comes from a very good family.”


trying to make it race issue?

ends with statement from daughter saying saw victims as part of family, article kindof turns it into more of a he-said she-said thing



fact summary from case:


https://www.unodc.org/cld/case-law-doc/traffickingpersonscrimetype/usa/2010/united_states_v._mahender_murlidhar_sabhnani_and_varsha_mahender_sabhnani_.html
	The 1st victim, a 53 year old woman from Indonesia, was arranged to travel to the US by the 2nd defendant’s mother, “Mrs. Joti”, in order to work in the US as a domestic servant for $ 200 per month. She was a rice vender who could not speak English, and had very limited knowledge about visas. She was brought to the US, accompanied by Mrs. Joti in February 2002.

	Upon her arrival, the defendants met her at the airport and then took her to their home. The 2nd defendant took the 1st victims passport and other travel related documents, and kept them until approximately April 2007, about one year after her passport had expired. While the 1st victim was in charge of cooking, cleaning, laundry, and other chores at the defendants’ house, she also did not receive the promised amount of money, $200 per month; instead the defendants gave her daughter in Indonesia $100 per month, so the victim did not receive any money from the defendants.

	The circumstances of the victim’s employment was more than severe; she was required to sleep on carpet outside the bedroom, and later on a floor mat in the kitchen. She worked for extremely long hours per day and was often deprived of sleep. The 2nd defendant refused to provide the victim with even the semblance of adequate clothing. The victim was also subjected to extremely harsh physical, and psychological treatment in the defendants’ home; the 2nd defendant beat the victim with various household objects; she was punished for sleeping late, for not receiving permission to throw out the garbage, for stealing food from the trash, and for failing to clean the garbage. The 2nd defendant also threatened the victim with a photograph showing her with milk, which could be used to show as if she was stealing the milk; by telling her that she would be killed by the 1st defendant; and by the letter which she was forced to write by the 2nd defendant. The victim was told that if she wanted to go back to Indonesia, she would have pay for all expenses for her travel back, and that she would be arrested by the police because of her illegal status. Most of the victim’s day-to-day supervision came from the 2nd defendant, though the 1st defendant also ordered her to serve various jobs and knew of the victim’s harsh employment conditions.

	The 1st defendant even reported the victim’s mistakes to the 2nd defendant, even though he understood the 2nd defendant would beat the victim for them. The 2nd victim, who was a 47 year old woman from Indonesia, was also recruited by Mrs. Joti in Indonesia. She had completed only first grade, and was unable to speak English. Immediately after her arrival upon the US, in January 2005, the defendants required her to work at their house. The 2nd defendant took her passport and other relevant documents, and kept them in the same locked place as one in which the 1st victim’s passport and other relevant documents were kept, until May 2007, nearly 2 years after the 2nd victim was required to depart from the US.

	Like the 1st victim, employment circumstances were severe; she was made to work lengthy hours; was generally denied food, sleep, and even medical care when she was sick or injured. She was also a witness to the 1st victim’s maltreatment at the 2nd defendant’s hands. Though she was not excluded from it; the 2nd defendant forced her to walk up and down stairs repeatedly as punishment for supposed misconduct. The victim was threatened by the 2nd defendant as well as the victim; he told her that if she ran away, the police would shoot her. She was also told that if she left, her husband in Indonesia, who had received advanced payment for her services, would be arrested. On the evening of May 12, 2007, the 1st victim ran away from the defendants’ house during their absence, carrying the expired Indonesian passport. She was taken to the medical center, and then reported to the police.

	Finally, the defendants were arrested on May 14, 2007 on charges of committing forced labor.


fact summary as found by court gives different impression if you'd only learned about this from NY Times


big problem with NY Times article is it relays facts found by court and law enforcement as words of victims

unusual that NY Times article spends a lot of ink on effect of case on the perps and their family and the effect on Indian community in U.S.--not the thing in public interest to learn about this case, and in the latter detrimental to racialize it


things missing from NY Times reporting:

- perps taking victims travel documents

- that victims family given half of promised amount and this went to family instead of them

- death threats against victims

- denying victims medical care

- holding travel documents of victims until they became illegal residents and then threatening the police would arrest them if they escaped


last ommission unusual given NY Times perceived stance on illegal immigration issues



http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2008-06-27/news/0806270039_1_millionaire-varsha-sabhnani-prison

Chicago Tribune not what it used to be (for better or worse)


http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2007-12-18/news/0712180438_1_indonesian-women-enslaving-millionaire-couple

dec 18 2007 article short, doesn't seem like too much slant or weasel words, short on details. Case is shocking/disgusting but wouldn't get good picture of that from tribune


NY Times dec 18:


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/18/nyregion/18slave.html
	Long Island Couple Convicted of Enslaving 2 Domestic Workers for Years

	By COREY KILGANNON DEC. 18, 2007

	CENTRAL ISLIP, N.Y. — The so-called Muttontown slave trial involved a wild barrage of testimony by two Indonesian domestic workers who were employed — and, prosecutors say, enslaved and tortured for years — by a well-to-do couple on Long Island. And the verdict Monday morning made for no less wild a scene.

	When it was announced that the jury in U.S. District Court here had found the couple, Mahender and Varsha Sabhnani, guilty, Ms. Sabhnani and one of their three daughters fainted, according to the authorities and to friends of the Sabhnanis.

	Both were taken to the hospital, from which they were later reported released.

	Judge Arthur D. Spatt cleared the courtroom before he had a chance to poll the jurors and ask them what monetary damages the couple should be ordered to pay the two former employees.

	The Sabhnanis — who were convicted on 12 counts, including involuntary servitude, conspiracy, forced labor and the harboring of aliens — could also face up to 40 years in prison.

	The determination of damages was postponed until Tuesday morning.


opens with "so-called slave trial", posits monetary damages

a weird way to open--could give impression this is more on the level of a civil suit? question to always ask is what would reader impression be if this was their only source

	
	In the trial, defense lawyers argued that the victims — identified only as Samirah, 51, and Enung, 47 — inflicted wounds on themselves as part of a traditional Indonesian folk cure, and cleverly devised the slave charges to obtain the immigration status conferred on victims of torture and abuse.

	The Sabhnanis’ daughters and their son huddled with relatives and friends in the courtroom, hours after the verdict.

	“They’re just devastated,” said a longtime family friend, Bharat Jotwani, outside the courtroom. “This was an all-American, law-abiding family that worked hard to achieve the American dream: They played by the rules, paid their taxes and raised four children.

	“I just spoke to their daughter Tina,” Mr. Jotwani said, “and she said, ‘How can this kind of thing happen in America — we’re supposed to trust the courts.’ Because her parents never did any of these things that were alleged.”

	The couple, who ran a multimillion-dollar perfume business from their home in Muttontown, an upscale hamlet on Long Island’s North Shore, harbored the two Indonesian women as illegal immigrants, prosecutors said. Both women held temporary work visas that had expired.

	The Sabhnanis were charged under a 2000 federal law that bans human trafficking and is most often applied in prostitution cases. The law makes it illegal to force someone to work under threat of violence. The couple’s treatment of the two workers amounted to a case of “modern-day slavery,” the indictment charged.

	According to the prosecution, the two women, kept for five years, were forced by the Sabhnanis to work long hours, fed sparingly and made to sleep on mats on the floor.

	They were kept away from visitors and threatened with violence, prosecutors said, and they suffered beatings, including knife wounds and cigarette burns, as well as torture that included being force-fed hot chili peppers.



article does more toward empathizing with perpetrators than victims

structure apparently to present both sides of case, but slanted toward defendents

for defendents, puts in words of family and friends, human factor of being worried and thinking they are being unfairly charged invites reader to empathize with perpetrators

for victims, puts in words of prosecutor after quote of "wild scene" and fainting from testimony of victims and friends questioning prosecutor's honesty. Invites reader to speculate its just lawyers making things sound worse than they are

"torture that included being force-fed hot chili peppers," but court found abuse far more extensive and disturbing than that. Picked an example easiest to trivialize.


also by Kilgannon:

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/nyregion/grieving-and-hunting-for-an-evil-person-after-a-jogger-is-killed.html

hint of a bias against victims of physical violence? so far, at least


https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/nyregion/queens-neighborhood-still-haunted-by-kitty-genoveses-murder.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=29&pgtype=collection

psychology of murder something he's interested in?


https://archive.nytimes.com/query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage-990CE5D9143FF934A25755C0A9669D8B63.html

why write this?


writes a lot of wordy quasi-poetic articles with vieled commentary on society

https://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/03/nyregion/03clarkstown.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1473&pgtype=collection


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/15/nyregion/15sam.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=2116&pgtype=collection


https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/nyregion/dogs-hurting-the-most-have-a-special-place-to-heal.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=89&pgtype=collection


https://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/10/16/amid-a-throng-of-day-laborers-he-stands-out/?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1872&pgtype=collection


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/12/nyregion/12panhandler.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1876&pgtype=collection


gives these dogs better treatment than victims of Sabhannis


writes a lot of character studies like this one:

https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/27/nyregion/born-in-the-basement-and-never-left.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=90&pgtype=collection


writes a lot on Jewish issues


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/23/nyregion/23trial.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1820&pgtype=collection

racializing a court case?

https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/19/nyregion/19shoot.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1822&pgtype=collection


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/25/nyregion/25jury.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1817&pgtype=collection

https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/27/nyregion/27white.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1816&pgtype=collection


so far comes off as they convinced a man for self-defense and milked it


another version of article on slavery case has two final paragraphs that make victim sound crazy:


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/17/nyregion/17cnd-slave.html
	...as well as tortures that included force-feeding them hot chili peppers.

	In the trial, a landscaper testified that one of the women had once approached him, indicated that she was hungry and uttered a single word: doughnut. He said he gave her some doughnuts and she ran back in the house.

	Finally, one of the women, Samirah, sought help by wandering into a Dunkin’ Donuts shop in Syosset one Sunday morning, slapping herself and uttering a word that sounded like “master.”


giving some attention to Trump in 2007:

https://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/08/nyregion/08trump.html?rref=collection%2Fbyline%2Fcorey-kilgannon&action=click&contentCollection=undefined&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1831&pgtype=collection


https://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/20/nyregion/20friedman.html

writes sympathetic article to convicted/confessed child molester Jessie Friedman (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capturing_the_Friedmans), implying testimony might be false since some of the children who testified were hypnotized


NY Times reports 6 years after this article that one of the children who testified said he made it up: https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/16/nyregion/reinvestigating-the-friedmans.html

article 10 days later on reinvestigation report says found Friedman very guilty: http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/jesse-friedman-100-guilty-child-abuse-article-1.1380786

says reinterviewed 3 victims and all told same story

something going on here? controversy on it picked up 2013, interesting Kilgannon preempted by 6 years



this article say anything about him? https://www.nytimes.com/2006/11/26/nyregion/nyregionspecial2/26licol.html


------


slavery was gone from britain by 1200s, but some people brought it back.

Who were these people and what was their motive?


might give some understanding of the people who made British empire tick, who so far seemed fucked up (hell-fire clubs)



http://spartacus-educational.com/USASafrica.htm
	At the end of the 14th century Europeans started to take people from Africa against their will. Initially they were mainly used as servants for the rich. The Europeans justified the taking of slaves by arguing that they were providing an opportunity for Africans to become Christians. The Spanish were the first Europeans to become involved in the slave-trade. However, in 1563 Francis Drake joined his cousin, John Hawkins, on a voyage to Africa. The two men started capturing people in Sierra Leone and selling them as slaves to Spanish settlers in the Caribbean. As it was illegal for the settlers to buy from foreigners, Hawkins and Drake soon came into conflict with the Spanish authorities. (1)


europeans took slaves from Africa near end of 14 century, tried to justify saying "providing an opportunity for Africans to become christians"

reminiscent of Philip Duke of Wharton using bible passages to defend hell-fire club in parliament or Franklin quoting people to defend his problems handling money

Evelyn lord book says Hell-Fire clubs didn't start until early 17th century


spartacus says Spanish first involved in slave trade, then Francis Drake and John Hawkins got involved. Did they start slave trade for Britain?


	When Spanish and Portuguese sea-captains began to explore the Americas they took their African servants with them. Some of these Africans proved to be excellent explorers. The most important of these was Estevanico, who led the first European expedition to New Mexico and Arizona.

	The people living in the Americas resisted the attempt by the Europeans to take over their land. One of he most important struggles took place in Cuba in 1512. Resistance was led by Hatuey. According to Bartolomé de Las Casas Hatuey claimed: "They tell us, these tyrants, that they adore a God of peace and equality, and yet they usurp our land and make us their slaves. They speak to us of an immortal soul and of their eternal rewards and punishments, and yet they rob our belongings, seduce our women, violate our daughters. Incapable of matching us in valor, these cowards cover themselves with iron that our weapons cannot break." (2)

	Diego Velázquez eventually suppressed the rebellion. He captured Hatuey and he was executed on 2nd February, 1512. It is estimated that over a million people lived in Cuba before the arrival of the Europeans. Twenty-five years later there were only 2,000 left. Large numbers had been killed, while others died of starvation, disease, committed suicide or had died from the consequences of being forced to work long hours in the gold mines. (3)

	After the arrival of the Europeans there was a sharp decline in the local population of most of the islands in the Caribbean Sea. This created a problem for the Europeans as they needed labour to exploit the natural resources of these islands. Eventually the Europeans came up with a solution: the importation of slaves from Africa. By 1540, an estimated 10,000 slaves a year were being brought from Africa to replace the diminishing local populations.

	According to Suzanne Schwarz, the author of Slave Captain: The Career of James Irving in the Liverpool Slave Trade (1995): "This sophisticated trade in human cargo was global and international, involving all the maritime powers in Europe, from Spain and Portugal to France, England, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and even Brandenburg. Some 37,000 slaving voyages cleared from ports of the Atlantic littoral between the early sixteenth and the mid-nineteenth century and, collectively, they transported an estimated eleven million individuals from Africa." (4) 


colonists killed many people in Americas like cuba through starvation and forced labor that led to death. Cuba population went from 1 million to 2,000 in 25 years.

After population died off, brought in slaves from Africa


if colonists wanted slaves for economic reasons, why kill them?



	...Royal African Company

	In 1672, Charles II gave the Royal African Company (RAC) the monopoly of the trade to supply slaves to the British colonies for the next 1,000 years. The British built coastal forts in Africa where they kept the captured Africans until the arrival of the slave-ships. The merchants obtained the slaves from African chiefs by giving them goods from Europe. At first, these slaves were often the captured soldiers from tribal wars. However, the demand for slaves become so great that raiding parties were organised to obtain young Africans.

	Over the next 20 years the company exported over 90,000 slaves to the Americas. In the 18th century Britain was mainly interested in Africa as a source of slaves. After a large number of petitions from merchants and manufacturers, the RAC lost its monopoly to provide slaves to the British Empire in 1698. They now opened up the business to independent companies but had to pay high taxes to the British government. This gave them rights to the infrastructure of the RAC. This included the coastal forts where they kept the captured Africans until the arrival of the slave-ships. Between 1698 and 1797, the new companies carried 75,000 slaves, compared to the 18,000 carried by the RAC. (5)

	It was estimated in 1796 that "every year about 72,000 slaves are carried from Africa to the West Indies... the Danes carry away about 3,0000, the Dutch 7,000, the French 18,000, the Portuguese 8,000, the English have all the rest." Over 85% of the Africans exported were carried in British ships. Most of these were based in Liverpool. It was reported in 1790 that the goods used to buy slaves from this area included guns, gunpowder, textiles, iron bars and brandy. Other popular items traded included copper, brass and pewter goods.


British slave trade picked up 1672, under Royal African Company given monopoly by crown. Later ended monopoly with independent companies paying taxes to British gov to use RAC infrastructure.

by late 18th century 85% of african slaves carried in British ships, British taking 36,000 a year.


	Treatment of Slaves

	In 1784 William Dillwyn published The Case of our Fellow Creatures, the Oppressed Africans. Dillwyn claimed that the slave-trade encouraged wars between the different tribal groups in Africa: "This traffic is the principal source of the destructive wars which prevail among these unhappy people, and is attended with consequences, the mere recital of which is shocking to humanity. The violent reparation of the dearest relatives, the tears of conjugal and parental affection, the reluctance of the slaves to a voyage from which they can have no chance of returning, must present scenes of distress which would pierce the heart of any, in whom the principles of humanity are not wholly effaced. This, however, is but the beginning of sorrows with the poor captives." (6)

	Hugh Crow, the captain of The Elizabeth, arrived at Annamaboe in December, 1790. Crow later recalled: "We came to anchor at Annamaboe in December, 1790, after a passage of seven weeks. We lay there about three weeks without transacting any trade, the king of that part of the coast having died some time before, in consequence of which all business was suspended. According to a barbarous custom of the country on occasion of the decease of a prince twenty-three of his wives were put to death while we remained; and many no doubt had met with a similar fate before our arrival." (7)

	Alexander Falconbridge, was a surgeon on board a slave ship. He wrote in 1790: "When the negroes whom the black traders have to dispose of are shown to the European purchasers, they first examine them relative to age. They then minutely inspect their persons, and inquire into their state of health; if they are afflicted with any infirmity, or are deformed, or have bad eyes or teeth; if they are lame, or weak in the joints, or distorted in the back, or of a slender make, or are narrow in the chest; in short, if they have been afflicted in any manner so as to render them incapable of such labour they are rejected. The traders frequently beat those negroes which are objected to by the captains. Instances have happened that the traders, when any of their negroes have been objected to have instantly beheaded them in the sight of the captain." (8) 


	...Explorers gave details of how the system worked. Mungo Park witnessed the taking of slaves from Africa. "The slaves are commonly secured by putting the right leg of one, and the left of another into the same pair of fetters. By supporting the fetters with string they can walk very slowly. Every four slaves are likewise fastened together by the necks. They were led out in their fetters every morning to the shade of the tamarind tree where they were encouraged to sing diverting songs to keep up their spirits; for although some of them sustained the hardships of their situation with amazing fortitude, the greater part were very much dejected, and would sit all day in the sort of sullen melancholy with their eyes fixed upon the ground." (11)

	The merchants obtained the slaves from African chiefs by giving them goods from Europe. At first, these slaves were often the captured soldiers from tribal wars. However, the demand for slaves become so great that raiding parties were organised to obtain young Africans. Ottobah Cugoano was a 13 year-old boy from Ghana when he was captured by slave traders: "I was snatched away from my native country, with about eighteen or twenty more boys and girls, as we were playing in a field. We lived but a few days' journey from the coast where we were kidnapped... Some of us attempted, in vain, to run away, but pistols and cutlasses were soon introduced, threatening, that if we offered to stir, we should all lie dead on the spot." (12) 


around late 18th century some writers wrote of horrors of slave trade (any others in other periods?)

they would go out in raiding parties and abduct people to be sold into slavery. Many would be beaten or killed if decided not good enough to be slave, even before disembarking on ship.

both black and white people were involved in slave trade, and appears race was not the determining factor for involvement in the slave trade


	...It is estimated that up to 15 million Africans were transported to the Americas between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries. (14) To maximize their profits slave merchants carried as many slaves as was physically possible on their ships. By the 17th century slaves could be purchased in Africa for about $25 and sold in the Americas for about $150. Even with a death-rate of 50 per cent, merchants could expect to make tremendous profits from the trade. The Liverpool merchant William Davenport reported that some voyages gave him a profit of as much as 147% on his investment. (15)

	Working on a slave-ship could also be very profitable. James Irving was a surgeon on the ship Vulture that sailed to Jamaica in November 1782. It has been argued by Suzanne Schwarz, the author of Slave Captain: The Career of James Irving in the Liverpool Slave Trade (1995): "Assuming that Irving was paid £4 wages a month, together with the value of two privilege slaves and one shilling head money for each of the 592 slaves delivered alive to the West Indies, it is likely that Irving earned approximately £140 from this voyage. This is consistent with the average voyage earnings of slave-ship surgeons in the late eighteenth century, which were typically between £100 and £150." (16) 


slave trade was very profitable for people involved


	The conditions on board the slave-ships were so appalling that rebellious slaves had to be punished very severely. Thomas Phillips, a slave-ship captain, wrote an account of his activities in A Journal of a Voyage (1746): "I have been informed that some commanders have cut off the legs or arms of the most willful slaves, to terrify the rest, for they believe that, if they lose a member, they cannot return home again: I was advised by some of my officers to do the same, but I could not be persuaded to entertain the least thought of it, much less to put in practice such barbarity and cruelty to poor creatures who, excepting their want of Christianity and true religion (their misfortune more than fault), are as much the works of God's hands, and no doubt as dear to him as ourselves." (17) 

	Thomas Trotter, a physician working on the slave-ship, Brookes, told a House of Commons committee in 1790: "The slaves that are out of irons are locked spoonways and locked to one another. It is the duty of the first mate to see them stowed in this manner every morning; those which do not get quickly into their places are compelled by the cat and, such was the situation when stowed in this manner, and when the ship had much motion at sea, they were often miserably bruised against the deck or against each other. I have seen their breasts heaving and observed them draw their breath, with all those laborious and anxious efforts for life which we observe in expiring animals subjected by experiment to bad air of various kinds." (18) It has been estimated that the mortality rate of Africans on board British ships was 13 per cent. (19) 


slavers would punish slaves by cutting off arms and legs. Slave ship captain Thomas Phillips appeared sympathetic and wrote he could not bring himself to do this, but wrote that slaves were "creatures" and pointed out their lack of Christianity. Wrote that despite lack of Christianity not their fault and must be as dear to God as British.

Was the "we are helping them by brining them Christianity" excuse used a lot? Phillips apparently thought about it. Why did Phillips write about them as if it were in question whether or not they were human? 

mortality rate on slave ships was 13%


	Church of England and Slavery

	The Church of England gave its full support to the British slave trade. Its leading clergy had stated its position on a number of occasions. Reference was made to St Paul who suggested that slaves serve their masters "with fear and trembling". It was argued that what St Paul meant was that "liberty could only be expected in the next world." (20)

	Another source often quoted was The City of God, a book of Christian philosophy written in Latin by Augustine of Hippo (later St. Augustine) in the early 5th century AD. According to Augustine, "by preserving the institution of slavery mankind could be disciplined and his self-aggrandisement corrected; and because no man was innocent, it was God's will alone who should be master and who should be a slave". (21)

	In 1778, the Reverend Raymond Harris produced a wealth of scriptural evidence to support his contention that slavery, and particularly slavery of blacks, was in accordance with the word of God. He used several passages from the Old Testament that suggested God approved of slavery. He also used the New Testament to support his view of slavery. Harris quoted from Christ's Sermon on the Mount as the basis for his argument that Christianity recognised the existing systems and institutions. "Think not that I am come to destroy the Law of the Prophets; I am not come to destroy but to fulfil." (22) 


leading clergy in Church of England repeatedly stated position supporting slavery. They would pick scripctures that could be used to support slavery, including a book by 5th century Christian philosopher St. Augustine.

Reverend Raymond Harris wrote a compilation of scripture to be used to support slavery of blacks in 1778


	The Church of England also owned a large number of slaves. Its missionary arm, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, were active in those areas where there were slave populations. Some wealthy slave owners, left them to the church when they died. Christopher Codrington, who owned a plantation in Barbados, and in a good year made a profit of £2,000 - roughly £265,000 in today's money. Codrington left 750 slaves to the Church. Soon afterwards the words "SOCIETY" was burned onto the chests of slaves with a red-hot iron. (23)

	In February 1766, William Warburton, the Bishop of Gloucester, made the first denunciation of the slave trade by a member of the Established Church when he complained that these bequeaths resulted in the Church becoming "innocent partakers of the fruits of this iniquitous traffic". (24) Despite this comment the plantation had one of the worst records in the Caribbean, with the death-rate being about five-sixths the birth-rate." (25) 


Church of England had large number of slaves, some wealthy slave owners left slaves to church such as Christopher Codrington.

Biship William Warbuton was first in established church to denounce slavery in 1766. Church-owned slave planation had one of the worst records, with high death-rate.


goes on to say opposition to slave trade came monstly from outside established religion, though some Church of England members opposed the slave trade and established Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1787.

some of those in the abolishionist movement around 1783 didn't do a good job (names Wilberforce)

article on British slave trade being "forgotten" that mentions weird story about Ben Affleck and likes Wilberforce: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/british-history-slavery-buried-scale-revealed


	...After the passing of Abolition of the Slave Trade Act in 1807, British captains who were caught continuing the trade were fined £100 for every slave found on board. However, this law did not stop the British slave trade. If slave-ships were in danger of being captured by the British navy, captains often reduced the fines they had to pay by ordering the slaves to be thrown into the sea.

	Some people involved in the anti-slave trade campaign argued that the only way to end the suffering of the slaves was to make slavery illegal. A new Anti-Slavery Society was formed in 1823. Members included Thomas Clarkson, Henry Brougham, William Wilberforce and Thomas Fowell Buxton. Although women were allowed to be members they were virtually excluded from its leadership.


first abolish act just introduced a fine, and some slavers were able to reduce fine by throwing slaves into the sea

tried for making it illegal after that


	...Parliament passed the Slavery Abolition Act in 1833. This act gave all slaves in the British Empire their freedom. The British government paid £20 million in compensation to the slave owners. The amount that the plantation owners received depended on the number of slaves that they had. For example, the Bishop of Exeter's 665 slaves resulted in him receiving £12,700. (38) 


passed abolition act in 1833 and gov paid compensation to slave owners (what about the freed slaves?)



...


slave trade was marked by excess death and cruelty throughout, on top of enslaving people in the first place. Britain took lead in slave trade and had institutions like RAC and Church of England supporting it. Abolishing trade met with difficulty.

how did Britain go from having no slaves and forefront of rights to that?


https://www.quora.com/What-was-the-history-of-slavery-in-England-Particularly-did-the-Normans-abolish-slavery-as-I-just-saw-claimed-to-my-surprise-on-a-documentary-and-if-so-when-was-it-reimplemented
	The Celts, the Romans, the Anglo-Saxons and the Vikings all practiced slavery. They were warlike cultures, and the standard practice after defeating an opponent was to drag some of them back home as slaves, to work in the fields or as domestic servants. It is estimated that at the time of the Norman Conquest about 10% of the population of England were slaves, or 'thralls'.

	Within a fairly brief time after the Norman Conquest, however, legal slavery died out in England. There was no single moment when we can say, "It ended here", but one key event was the Council of London in 1102. This was called by Anselm, the Norman-born Archbishop of Canterbury appointed by King William II. Anselm was a reformer, and the Council passed many laws regulating the Church in England, for example banning clerical marriage or the sale of church offices.

	However, the Council also banned the slave trade: "the infamous business, prevalent in England, of selling men like animals". This was canon law, not royal law; a slave trader would find himself brought before an ecclesiastical court, not the King's courts, but he would still face punishment.

	The Council of London did not forbid slavery itself; but with no easy access to new slaves, the practice withered away to nothing within two generations. Another factor in this was that England was now a comparatively strong, centralised state: the turbulence of the earlier period, with civil wars, Viking invasions, Irish raids and Scottish incursions, was much lessened; meaning that the supply of slaves through warfare was diminished.

	Finally, there were economic causes. Slaves need supervision if they are not going to run away or refuse to work. That is acceptable on a small farmstead where the thralls live and work alongside their masters. The new Norman nobility, on the other hand, were a small elite ruling over a large, conquered kingdom. Each baron owned comparatively huge tracts of land compared to his predecessor, the Saxon thegn; with many estates scattered around the country, he could not possibly supervise them all personally. Manumission of his slaves made economic sense. By giving them a stake in the land and its profits, they could be left to their own devices to a much greater extent.

	There is a tendency among some writers to confuse slavery and serfdom, or minimise the differences. It is true that serfs were described as 'unfree' and suffered various restrictions on their actions; but nevertheless they possessed freedoms that slaves could only dream of. Serfs (in England, at least) enjoyed liberty of person, legal standing, and the right to own property; the one major thing they lacked was freedom of movement.

	A serf was 'tied to the land': he could not leave his home village without his lord's permission, and he had to pay rent for use of his land, usually in the form of labour services or a share of the crop rather than in money. However, 'tied to the land' worked both ways: a serf could not be evicted (provided he paid his rent) or sold to a new master. A slave's family might be split up, with husband and wife and children being sold separately to different owners: that could not happen with serfs.

	A slave could be whipped or even killed at his master's whim; a serf had the full protection of the law for his personal integrity. A slave had no standing in law -- he was merely a chattel; a serf could plead in court and even bring a legal action against his own master. A slave owned no property, and anything he earned belonged to his master (though some masters let their slaves keep some earnings as a privilege and incentive); a serf owned outright the produce of the land he farmed, and was free to buy and sell it as he chose (subject to rents and taxes, of course, but they applied to freemen as well).

	As for the question 'when was it reimplemented', the answer is 'never'. Slavery died out before English Common Law came into existence, and was never made legal. Various court cases such as Cartwright's case in 1569 and Somersett's case in 1772 did not, as is sometimes alleged, make slavery illegal in England: rather, they confirmed that slavery had always been illegal, since time immemorial.

	The fact that slavery was illegal in England did not mean it never happened. Murder is also illegal, and people still get murdered. But there's a difference between a crime, that will be punished if it is discovered, and a business that respectable people can conduct in the broad light of day. It should also be noted that English Common Law only applied within the jurisdiction of English courts. British colonies abroad could pass their own laws, and some colonists did choose to legalise slavery within their own jurisdictions. British merchants also considered themselves free to buy slaves from one country where slavery was still legal and sell them in another, as long as they did not set foot upon the soil of England itself in passage; a practice that was not prevented by English law until 1807.

	...

	...It wasn't reimplemented. Slavery has not been legal in the UK since the Normans. They incorporated slavery into serfdom, which then gradually died out and ended entirely in 1574, when Elizabeth freed the last remaining serfs.

	However, there wasn't a law against engaging in the slave trade outside the UK until 1807. Up until that point, British companies and private individuals were extremely active in the international slave trade. Finally in 1833, slavery was abolished throughout the Empire, with certain exceptions which were eliminated 10 years later.

	The history of race relations in the UK is influenced by things like the Empire and the Windrush far more than by slavery, because slavery has not been a factor of ordinary British life for over a thousand years.


https://www.quora.com/What-happened-to-the-slaves-in-Britain-after-slavery-was-abolished?share-1
	What happened to the slaves in Britain after slavery was abolished?

	...Slavery was abolished in England early in the 12th century, soon after the Norman Conquest. It lingered on in Scotland for a century or more afterwards, but died out there as well.

	The slaves were simply absorbed into the peasantry. They may have become cottars, hiring themselves out to the wealthier peasants as labourers in return for wages (which would usually be paid in kind -- food, clothes, etc, though cash wages gradually became more common over the centuries.) Or they may have acquired land, either from a division of the village fields that now included them, or from clearing an 'assart' from the wildlands around the village, or by marriage. Or they could have headed for the cities to find work there.

	Either way, since the slaves held by the Anglo-Saxons, Anglo-Norse and Celts were genetically identical to their masters, they would quickly become indistinguishable from them once there was no longer any social recognition of the status of 'slave'.

	From that time on, it was the law that any slave who set foot on British soil instantly became free the moment they 'breathed the free air of England'. There were occasional challenges to that principle — slave-owners from abroad wanted the right to bring their foreign-owned slaves onto British soil, and since they were usually rich and powerful, they often got away with it. But Somersett's Case in 1772 for England and Knight v Wedderburn in 1778 for Scotland confirmed that slavery did not exist in either English Common Law nor Scots Law.


slavery in England stayed illegal since 13th century, only did slave trade and move slaves to colonies



this says Hawkins and Drake were first in British slave trade:

http://abolition.e2bn.org/slavery_45.html
	Captain John Hawkins made the first known English slaving voyage to Africa, in 1562, in the reign of Elizabeth 1. Hawkins made three such journeys over a period of six years. He captured over 1200 Africans and sold them as goods in the Spanish colonies in the Americas. 

	To start with, British traders supplied slaves for the Spanish and Portuguese colonists in America. However, as British settlements in the Caribbean and North America grew, often through wars with European countries such as Holland, Spain and France, British slave traders increasingly supplied British colonies

	The exact number of British ships that took part in the Slave Trade will probably never be known but, in the 245 years between Hawkins first voyage and the abolition of the Slave Trade in 1807, merchants in Britain despatched about 10,000 voyages to Africa for slaves, with merchants in other parts of the British Empire perhaps fitting out a further 1,150 voyages.


http://www.bbc.co.uk/devon/content/articles/2007/01/18/abolition_plymouth_slave_trade_feature.shtml
	John Hawkins was England's first slave trader. In 1562 he sailed from The Barbican in Plymouth with three ships and violently kidnapped about 400 Africans in Guinea, later trading them in the West Indies.

	Between 1562 and 1567 Hawkins and his cousin Francis Drake made three voyages to Guinea and Sierra Leone and enslaved between 1,200 and 1,400 Africans.

	According to slavers' accounts of the time this would probably have involved the death of three times that number.

	The pattern was consistent. Hawkins sailed for the west coast of Africa and, sometimes with the help of other African natives, kidnapped villagers.

	He would then cross the Atlantic and sell his cargo, or those who survived the voyage, to the Spanish. The slave trade was better business than plantations.

	Hawkins' personal profit from selling slaves was so huge that Queen Elizabeth I granted him a special coat of arms, which has a c.



the pride of the British people was the magna carta and human rights. If Drake helped pioneer the British slave trade, why was he made out to be a British hero?



https://englishhistoryauthors.blogspot.com/2012/10/sir-francis-drake-and-african-slaves-by.html
	Sir Francis Drake and the African Slaves, by Tim Vicary

	As a boy, growing up in Devon, I was taught that Francis Drake and John Hawkins were great Elizabethan heroes.  Drake was the first Englishman to sail around the world, to return with untold riches and be knighted by Queen Elizabeth on the deck of his ship, the Golden Hind; Hawkins was the founder of the Royal Navy, the man who designed and built the fast, weatherly galleons which sailed rings around the Spanish Armada.

	These men were pioneers, adventurers, founders of the British Empire. Everything they did seemed admirable. They had saved the nation once; if England were ever in danger of invasion again all we had to do was to sound Drake’s Drum (which was hidden somewhere in Plymouth) and like King Arthur, he would rise from the dead and sail back to our rescue. As schoolboys, we basked in the reflected glory of these men. The symbol for the county of Devon was an Elizabethan galleon – Drake’s ship - sailing proudly across a blue sea.

	...Do today’s school children learn much about Francis Drake and John Hawkins? I wonder. If they do, I’m sure they are taught a different version of British history differently to the one I learned; and to an extent, that’s quite right. For Sir Francis Drake was not just a hero; he was also a pirate and a thief. He was licensed by the Queen to steal, burn and destroy Spanish ships and colonies in the New World. He was as feared and hated by the Spanish just as much as the Vikings once were by English monks, or Somali pirates are by sailors today. 

	So what about his cousin, Sir John Hawkins, the founder of the British Navy, the man who built Queen Elizabeth’s galleons to defend us against the Spanish Armada? Surely he was no pirate; he was a respectable merchant, a shipowner,  a businessman, a senior civil servant.

	Well, yes. He was all of those things. But he was a slave trader too. That’s where much of his wealth came from.


author goes on to try to exonerate Drake and plug his book



...


from Walvin "A Short History of Slavery"

around pg 38 says American colonies were initially filled with slaves, especially on sugar plantations (Walvin has another book pointing out sugar trade damage to world)


http://teachinghistory.org/history-content/ask-a-historian/25577
	In the 13 mainland colonies of British North America, slavery was not the peculiar institution of the South. This development would occur after the American Revolution and during the first decades of the 19th century. Although slaves had been sold in the American colonies since at least 1619, slave labor did not come to represent a significant proportion of the labor force in any part of North America until the last quarter of the 17th century. After that time, the numbers of slaves grew exponentially. By 1776, African Americans comprised about 20% of the entire population in the 13 mainland colonies. 

	This figure, however, masks important regional differences. It is important to remember that the North American mainland was a relatively minor destination in the global slave-trading network. Less than 4% of all African slaves were sent to North America. The vast majority of enslaved people ended up in sugar-producing regions of Brazil and the West Indies. On the mainland British colonies, the demand for labor varied by region. In contrast to the middle and New England colonies, the Southern colonies chose to export labor-intensive crops: tobacco in Chesapeake (Virginia and Maryland) and rice and indigo in South Carolina, which were believed to be very profitable.

	Large vs. Small Plantations

	By the time of the American Revolution, slaves comprised about 60% of South Carolina's total population and 40% of Virginia's.

	...Although the largest percentages of slaves were found in the South, slavery did exist in the middle and Northern colonies. The overall percentage of slaves in New England was only 2-3%, but in cities such as Boston and Newport, 20-25% percent of the population consisted of enslaved laborers. Other large cities, such as Philadelphia and New York, also supported significant enslaved populations. 


https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Brazilian_and_United_States_Slavery_Compared
	From 1759 to 1803, according to Keller, the colonial registers give as consigned from Angola to Brazil 642,000 Negroes. Thus, by 1800 fully one half of the total Brazilian population of 3,200,000 was slave, and by 1818 there were 1,930,000 slaves besides some 526,000 free Negroes and mulattoes, in all about sixty-three per cent of the total.[4] By the middle of the nineteenth century there was something like three millions of slaves out of a population of seven and a half millions. Lord Palmerston estimated the total number of slaves in the sixties as being 3,000,000;[5] whereas a writer in the "Revue des deux Mondes" puts the number between 2,500,000 and 4,000,000.[6] Dawson quotes the number of slaves in 1856 as being approximately 2,500,000 or forty per cent of the total population.[7] Apparently there is no actual census available on the number of slaves for this period. Needless to say, the slaves easily comprised from forty to fifty per cent of the population, and if we add all those of mixed blood we have a majority of the inhabitants of Brazil.

	Now let us turn to the Old South. Slavery we know progressed somewhat in the southern colonies, and to a negligible extent in the New England colonies. The "Asiento" in 1713, by which Great Britain at the close of the War of Spanish Succession secured the right to supply the colonies of Spain with 4,800 slaves annually,[8] augmented the slave trade throughout the new world. Negroes were in demand in the rice areas, cotton fields, and tobacco plantations. In 1710 there were only 50,000 slaves in the United States, the number increased to 220,000 in 1750, to 464,000 in 1770,[9] until the year 1790 they numbered 697,624.[10] This number constituted one-fifth of our total population.



is this how British imperialists thought of their colonies? keep slavery out of Britain, but send slaves to colonies for labor for resources for empire. Ended up with some colonies having half the population enslaved.


Walvin pg 42:

	...Because the Portuguese were the initial Atlantic slave traders, they dominated the supply points in Africa. But how could they hope to keep interlopers out of so vast a geographic stretch of African coastline? What was to stop other merchants and adventurers plucking their own Africans from the coast and shipping them to eager purchasers in the Americas? This is exactly waht the first English merchants did, encourged and backed by the Crown (itself prompted in part by diplomatic disputes with the Iberian Crowns.) In 1555 William Towerson was the first Englishman to break into the Atlantic slave trade, making a second voyage the year after. More famously, in 1562 John Hawkins ('Queen Elizabeth's slave trader') made his first piratical incursion into the trade, repeating it in 1564-5 and again in 1567-8. That Hawkins had royal approval and support moved this English involvement beyond the mere commercial or piratical: the English state and monarchy had made a clear declaration (however disguised) of its intention to follow the lucrative path fashioned by their Iberian rivals, and to trade in African humanity.


Walvin suggests British crown initial involvement in slave trade prompted by rivaly with spanish and Portuguese and motivated by money


pg 50

	
	...As we have seen, the British played no part in the origins, and little part in the early development, of the Atlantic slave trade. From the early seventeenth century onwards, however, they were to transform it. But, like that of the pioneers before them, their was a complex story, played out in three corners of the Atlantic: in Europe, Africa and the Americas.


Walvin focuses mostly on the economics of slavery

goes on to say sugar trade motivated British to more involvement in slave trade since it required a lot of raw labour


book does analysis of economics of slavery but short on names of decisionmakers for slave trade, how it got popularized, PR for slave trade. Seems odd to conclude sugar plantations the reason for slave trade since you could have free people do that work; the question is why did they decide to use slaves for that work? why did people decide to start and grow the slave trade? why was it so brutal?



this says economic debate on whether slavery profitable centuries old: http://www.ibtimes.com/economics-slavery-centuries-old-debate-surfaces-again-economist-1412802


with slavery ended up with millions of people unable to reach potential, taken out of economy in sense of not able to buy things

similar to debates on fair trade and economic sense of poor labor conditions today


https://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/09/economic-history-2 
	Did slavery make economic sense?

	Slavery worked for slave-owners but for very few others

	THE profitability of slavery is an enduring question of economic history. Thomas Gowan, writing way back in 1942, noted wearily that “the debate […] has been going on, in one form or another, for almost one hundred and fifty years.” 

	Intuitively, a business that uses slaves should be profitable. You pay your workers nothing, and reap the benefits of their labour. And some economic historians try to show just how lucrative it was. 

	...Individual businesses might have done well out of the slave trade. But the effect of slavery on wider economic development is also important. 

	John Elliott Cairnes, an economist, reckoned that slavery stifled economic growth in the South. Cairnes argued that reluctant workers depleted soils more quickly. In addition, scientific agriculture was impossible. Reluctant slaves, with little interest in learning, had no interest in using new farming techniques. And this meant that Southern farms lost competitiveness to their Northern counterparts.  

	Others reckon that slavery made it difficult for the South to establish trading networks. According to Ralph Anderson and Robert Gallman, slavery forced planters to diversify their economic activities. The costs of owning a slave—such as food and shelter—were pretty constant. And so if plantations specialised in a certain crop, they left themselves open to sudden drops in income and consequently big losses. But by pursuing a range of economic activities, they had a steadier revenue flow to match their fixed costs.    

	Diversification posed problems. Messrs Anderson and Gallman argue that it inhibited trade within the South—and, consequently, the development of towns and villages. Slaveowners found it easier to produce something themselves, rather than buy it. And the South found it difficult to develop a manufacturing industry—instead, it depended on imports from the North. As a result, economic growth was stifled.  

	Slavery hindered the development of Southern capitalism in other ways. Eugene Genovese, writing in 1961, reckoned that the antebellum South was not profit-seeking. In fact, slavery was not even meant to be profitable. Slaveowners were keener on flaunting their vast plantations and huge reserves of slaves than they were about profits and investment. Rational economic decisions were sacrificed for pomp and circumstance.


would British crown had been any less wealthy without slavery? more so? article says bad for world economy but made slave owners wealthy, so maybe gave advantage to them not in the sense of having more wealth but having more wealth than everyone else. On the other hand, British empire was 1/4 world population and probably much more of world economy. Some colonies were more than 50% slaves.



this says 25% of American colonies enslaved in 1750: https://learningenglish.voanews.com/a/a-23-2007-11-21-voa2-83131747/126790.html



https://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/HIST321-8.2.3-The-Sugar-Revolutions-and-Slavery.pdf
	Before the slave trade ended, the Caribbean had taken approximately 47 percent of the 10 million African slaves brought to the Americas. Of this number, about 17 percent came to the British Caribbean. Although the white populations maintained their superior social positions, they became a numerical minority in all the islands. In the early nineteenth century, fewer than 5 percent of the total population of Jamaica, Grenada, Nevis, St. Vincent, and Tobago was white, fewer than 10 percent of the population of Anguilla, Montserrat, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, and the Virgin Islands. Only in the Bahamas, Barbados, and Trinidad was more than 10 percent of the total population white. By sharp contrast, Trinidad was the only colony in the British Caribbean to have fewer than 80 percent of its population enslaved. Sugar and slavery gave to the region a predominantly African population



http://mortenjerven.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/AfricanPopulation.Methods.pdf
	External Slave Trade as a factor in African population(Manning 1979, 1982).For the Bight of Benin 1690 –1740, estimates in this work suggested that captive exports averaged over 2% of the regional population per year, which surely brought population decline. This raised the question of the demographic effects of enslavement more generally in Africa.

	...Comparisons of Africa and other world regions. Comparisons of Africa and other world regions. Figure 3 provides a schematic comparison of population totals by continental region from 1700 to 2000, relying mostly on figures developed by Angus Maddison, and comparing Maddison’s estimates for Africa with those developed in the present study. Western Europe’s apparent steady population growth across three centuries contrasts rather sharply with the shifts from slow to rapid growth for other regions. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, African population remained relatively constant at a time when all other continental regions were experiencing growth



------



this says even around end of slave trade British public thought slave trade was not going to change:

https://newint.org/features/special/2007/03/01/anti-slavery
	‘If you had proposed,’ says Hochschild, ‘in the London of early 1787, to change all of this, nine out of ten people would have laughed you off as a crackpot. The tenth might have admitted that slavery was unpleasant but said that to end it would wreck the British Empire’s economy. It would be as if, today, you maintained that the automobile must go.’

	...A Church of England pastor, he became inflamed by the immorality of the slave trade when he penned an essay on the subject for a Cambridge university competition as a young man. Having won the competition, he found that he could not shift the subject from his head. Riding home one evening on horseback, he was overwhelmed by his calling. ‘It was time some person should see these calamities to their end,’ he declared.

	He instigated the 1787 meeting that was to become the launchpad for what has been described as one of the ‘most organized citizen’s movements of all time’. Over the course of the campaign he was to clock up 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometres) on horseback as he toured the country gathering support. The campaign which was to take over the rest of his life not only radically shifted public opinion, but, for the first time in history, united people in support of a cause that bettered someone else’s rights rather than their own.

	For, unlike previous popular causes, no Briton was adversely affected by the slave trade; indeed the livelihoods of many – from the traders themselves to sailors, carpenters and shipbuilders – depended on it. 

	And yet, in a short space of time, the British people were united in empathy for the suffering of slaves, their outcry mirroring the response 200 years later to apartheid in South Africa or the 1980s famine in Ethiopia.

	At the heart of the abolitionist movement was the Anti-Slavery Committee, led by Clarkson. Its first job was to compile evidence to make the case for the abolition of the slave trade. Today’s Make Poverty History campaigners have the use of global mass media to spread information; Clarkson and his committee had to scour the country for visual aids that would tell the story graphically.

	In a shop in Liverpool Clarkson purchased examples of the equipment used to contain and torture slaves, including leg shackles, thumbscrews and surgical instruments used to pry open the mouths of those who went on hunger strike. Key to his armoury was a diagram of the slave ship _Brookes_, which became one of the most enduring images of the horrors of the slave trade (see above). Showing a top-down view of rows of 482 slaves’ bodies packed like sardines into a ship, it highlighted the conditions of life on board a slave ship. Over the course of the campaign this image was printed over 700 times. 


Clarkson ran a campaign to show the horrors of the slave trade, and this organized many Britons against the slave trade quickly

article points to economic reasons, ignorance and apathy among British public in not opposing slave trade before abolition


around the same time successful slave rebellions led to killing thousands of slave owners and burning their plantations




------







------


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y9n6ZEHiD88

"In what ways did Britain maintain its control over its colonies?"

by Dr. Christopher Prior University College Dublin


seems good, goes over mechanisms of how they controlled colonies, cuts out short




------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Dee