
https://www.quora.com/Is-there-any-evidence-that-Benjamin-Franklin-was-ever-a-spy-for-the-British
	Is there any evidence that Benjamin Franklin was ever a spy for the British?


wouldn't that be something?



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Andr%C3%A9
	John André (2 May 1750 – 2 October 1780) was a British Army officer hanged as a spy by the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War for assisting Benedict Arnold's attempted surrender of the fort at West Point, New York to the British.

	...During his nearly nine months in Philadelphia, André occupied Benjamin Franklin's house, from which it has been claimed that he removed several valuable items on the orders of Major-General Charles Grey when the British left Philadelphia, including an oil portrait of Franklin by Benjamin Wilson. Grey's descendants returned Franklin's portrait to the United States in 1906, the bicentennial of Franklin's birth. The painting now hangs in the White House.[1]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Wentworth_(spy)
	Paul Wentworth (c. 1736–1793) was a British intelligence agent and politician who sat in the House of Commons briefly in 1780.

	...Wentworth was to spy on the American delegation to the French court when Silas Deane was sent to Paris in 1776. Deane and Benjamin Franklin were both old friends of Wentworth and he could easily make the necessary contacts. Wentworth’s friend Edward Bancroft joined the American mission in Paris in 1776 and. Wentworth recruited him to spy for the British government in December 1776.[1] In 1777 Pierre Beaumarchais wrote to Vergennes that Wentworth spoke French “like you and better than I do: he is one of the cleverest men in England”.[2] In 1778 Wentworth was in discussions with Franklin on peace terms but the effect of this was to help drive the French into alliance with the Americans.[1]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Bancroft
	Edward Bartholomew Bancroft (January 20, 1745 [O.S. January 9, 1744][1] – September 7, 1821) was a Massachusetts born physician and chemist who became a double-agent, spying for both the United States and Great Britain while serving as secretary to the American Commission in Paris during the American Revolution.

	...Franklin's possible knowledge of Bancroft's intrigue

	On January 19, 1777, Franklin wrote to Juliana Ritchie, a woman living in a Benedictine convent in Cambrai, that even if he suspected his valet to be a spy, "as he probably is, I think I should not discharge him for that, if in other Respects I lik'd him."[2][23] Although some historians believe the letter indicates Franklin's suspicion of Bancroft, others have noted that after the war, Franklin remained on good terms with Bancroft while he shunned other Loyalists, including his own son, William.[24] The vast majority of historians reject the thesis that Franklin was in any way disloyal to the United States.[25]


https://www.quora.com/Is-there-any-evidence-that-Benjamin-Franklin-was-ever-a-spy-for-the-British
	Benjamin Franklin was a very smart man, and a master of the art of the cloak and dagger when he needed to be. While he was the chief representative of the colonies in France he was at the center of a very fluid network of information in Paris. He communicated with the best and brightest, and would even drop morsels of information to prime the pump for more from others by believing they were in his confidence. The trickiest game of cat and mouse was with his secretary, who was a British informant/spy. Ben would strategically leave some sensitive bits of information out, knowing his secretary would see it and report it, and would also leave out false trails as well. This way he was able to control the flow of information to the British to prevent critical misunderstandings from arising. When John Adams got there he was horrified by the lack of security at Franklin’s quarters. But this intricately woven web built critical relationships and gained information/contacts that served as a net benefit to the cause of the colonies. He was crazy like a fox and kept careful track of each scrap of information and how it traveled, and who gained access to it. His friendly contacts in Britain would report the response to each bit of information in the ministry and monarchy, which would further attune his efforts to keep the really important stuff OUT of English hands. Some lower level bureaucrats may have thought Ben a fool or a British spy for the information they got from him, but they seldom saw the Big Picture. Ben invested information to reap a harvest of vital data that advanced the American cause, his greatest goal.




https://io9.gizmodo.com/newly-declassified-cia-document-says-ben-franklin-was-a-1641256025
	Newly-Declassified CIA Document Says Ben Franklin Was A Security Risk




https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000872649.pdf
	British Penetration of America's First Diplomatic Mission


	...About 220 years ago as the American colonies were fighting for their independence, the Continental Congress established a three-man American Commission in Paris with the objectie of formalizing a treaty of alliance against Britain. Its efforts were to be discreet, if not entirely covert, and its success or failure would determine the outcome of the war for independence.

	The Commission was a counterintelligence disaster from the start. Its physical security was poor, its personnel security nonexistent, and its three commissioners had no real conterintelligence awareness. Because France was a "friendly" country providing covert assistance to the revolution, the three Americans apparently felt comfortable and secure under the "protection" of the French Government. They underestimated the ability of the British to operate against them in a third country.

	The British coverage of the Commission was highly professional, comprehensive, and aggresive. It included the theft of documents, penetration agents in the Commission, access agents, and manipulations of the principle targets based on personality assessment information. The British had a complete picture of American-French activities supporting the war in America and of American intentions regarding an alliance with France. The British used this intelligence effectively against the American cause. From their coverage of shipping activities, the British were able to seize badly needed supplies destined for George Washington's army. The British Minister in Paris also used timely and accurate intelligence on American supply efforts and paramilitary activities in the English Channel to force the French Government to become less blatant in its support for these activities.


	...Within a few months, the Committee of Correspondence sent one of its members, Silas Deane, to Paris to obtain military supplies and to probe the French Government's attitudes toward a declaration of independence and a treaty of alliance against Britain. In his instructions to Deane, Franklin provided the names of several trusted individuals in Europe worthy of contact, including Dr. Edward Bancroft of London.

	A Valuable British Spy

	The American-born Bancroft was an old friend of Franklin's, and he was a respected scientist and businessman in Britain. The two had met in London in the early 1770s, when Franklin was a colonial business agent. He had acted as a mentor to Bancroft, sponsoring him for the British Royal Society in May 1733 and involving him in a land speculation deal in the colonies.

	...Deane was impressed with Bancroft, and he discussed with him the status of negotiations with the French Government regarding an alliance. Within two days of Deane's arrival in Paris, Lord Stormon, the British Minister in Paris and the local head of British intelligence, advised London that "Nathan Rumsey," the British codename for Deane, was in Paris.


	...Shortly after Bancroft's return to London, American-born businessman Paul Wentworth called on him to discuss his visit with Deane. Wentworth had been a businessman in London for many years and had befriended Bancroft in the late 1760s. In 1769, he hired Bancroft to work on his Surinam plantation for a few years. In 1772, as political problems grew in the American colonies, Wentworth was recruited by British intelligence to report on colonial activities and on other Americans in London.

	...Wentworth's visit resulted in Bancroft providing an account of Deane's mission to France. This report, dated 14 August, provided detailed intelligence information, as well as operational information which could be used to monitor American-French activities through other intelligence resources. It was well received by the British, and two days later Stormont was advised of the full extent of Deane's mission in France.

	...Wentworth formalized his arrangements with Bancroft for reporting on American activities in France. The terms of agreement are noted in a December 1776 letter from Wentworth to William Eden, the undersecretary of state in the Northen Department of the British Foreign Ministry, and the official responsible for coordinating intelligence collection in the Foreign Ministry against the American Commission in Paris:

		Dr. Edwards [Bancroft's cover-name] engages to correspond with Mr. Wentworth and to communicate to him, whatever may come to his knowledge on the following subjects. The progress of the Treaty with France, and of the assistance expected ...The agents in the foreign island in America, and the means of carrying on the commerce with the northern colonies. The means of obtaining credit--effects and money; and the channels and agents used to supply them; the secret moves about the courts of France and Spain, and the Congress agents, and tracing the lives from one to the other. Franklin and Deane's correspondence with Congress, and their agents; and the secret, as well as the ostensible letters from the Congress to them. ...The intelligence that may arrive from America, the captures made by their privateers, and the instructions received from the deputies. How the captures are disposed of.


	...A Sophisticated Adversary

	By the time of the American Revolution, the concept and practice of collecting intelligence was well established in the British Government. While no centralized organizations issued requirements and analyzed reports, these responsibilities were handled by King George III, through his Prime Minister Lord North. The two major elements of intelligence collection on American activities in France and the rest of Europe were Eden's network operating out of the Foreign Office and Admirality intelligence reporting to the Secretary of the Royal Navy. Eden concentrated on political intelligence and the Navy on shipping intelligence. In the case of American activities in France and throughout Europe, these reporting areas often overlapped. Eden specifically targeted American-born British subjects in England for recruitment.

	In Paris, Lord Stormont ran several reporting sources on American activities at French ports. These sources included John Barton and Company, a British firm at Bordeax; David Allen, A. Keith, and John Williams, a distant relative of Franklin's at Nantes



https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Franklin/01-26-02-0328
	To Benjamin Franklin from John Williams, 1 May 1778

	Honourable Sir,

	I now find that I have been most cruelly and Shamefully as well as designedly deceived and deluded here by pretended friends whose deep designs have but lately Come fully to light, and which had I an opportunity of explaining would lessen the wonder that has been excited in my friends in France, at my tarrying here.5

	...5. I.e., London. He was presumably in financial troubles, to which he was prone.

	...Dr. Smith, the bearer has so long and so uniformly taken such a Very public and active part against the present administrators that it is unnecessary for me to say much in his favour as a friend to America.6

	...6. Dr. James Smith (1738–1812), the brother of William, the New York Loyalist, historian, and gossipy diarist, will appear frequently in later volumes. He graduated from the College of N.J. in 1757, studied medicine in London and Edinburgh and took his degree from Leyden, then returned to America in 1767. For three years he was a professor of chemistry and materia medica at King’s College, now Columbia, but left to become “a Wanderer and an Adventurer,” in John Adams’ words, “in the West Indies and in England.” He lived for a time in Surrey, and in May of 1778 appeared with his family in Paris and approached the commissioners. Whether he came as a spy or merely as a favor-seeker they did not know (nor does any one else to this day), but he managed in short order to alienate both BF and Lee. Envy, BF told his colleagues, was a disease he hoped never to catch; “I had rather have the pox and Dr. Smith for my Physician.” 

	...He has almost wholly sacrificed his own private intrest and Estate in the cause, and I have every reason to beleive, has never had any Kind of communication with the present set of Ministers. I beg leave to refer you to him for many particulars;7

	...7. These may have had unusual interest. Smith is said to have brought BF, from Williams, substantiation of a charge against Samuel Wharton that came into the open a few weeks later. The story, as it emerges from Wharton’s correspondence, is a web of hearsay about who said what to whom, but does seem to establish that Lord North was involved. Williams had apparently been trying, at least since the previous November, to ingratiate himself with Whitehall in order to get onto its payroll: Stevens, Facsimiles, III, nos. 310–11; VIII, no. 768, p. 2. But he was not trusted. The government believed that he had given the commissioners the names of its American spies in Paris, according to Wharton, and thereby forced them to leave the city. Williams, North told him in an interview in early March, would lose the support he had been seeking; the Minister further revealed, when pressed, that Wharton had been the source of Whitehall’s information. Some months later Wharton learned of this interview, and indignantly denied that he had had the least contact with North or his henchmen; he asked to have his denial forwarded to BF. Wharton to [Bancroft], May 19, 22, and to Williams, May 20, 26; Williams to Wharton, May 23, 1778. APS. Wharton subsequently appealed directly to BF, and through him to the other commissioners, and enclosed his correspondence with Williams: below, June 2.

	...I send here enclosed a Letter from Mrs. Huston which will acquaint you with Mrs. Stevensons lame Situation.8 And I shall wait in [on] them for their commands before I take my departure and shall be made extremely happy to receive my commands from you. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect and faithfullness Honored Sir your devoted and most Humble Servant

	Jno Williams

	Dr Franklin &c &c &c


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000872649.pdf
	...and John Hunter at Rennes, who also covered activities at Brest, St. Malo, and L'Orient. These assets' reporting was passed through the British Foreign Office intelligence network. Stormont also controlled agents targeted against the French Government and the American Commission, with the able assistance of Horace Saint Paul, another senior British official at the Mission, and Thomas Jean, a personal assistant to the minister, who did much of the "on-the-street" work. Stormont's agents included on in the Archives Section of the French Foreign Ministry, who was able to provide official minutes of the first meeting between Franklin and French Foreign Minister Count de Vergennes on 28 December 1776.

	The shipping intelligence obtained by the British was particularly effective from May 1777 through April 1778. During that period, the British intercepted every supply ship bound for America carrying correspondence from the Paris Commission to the Continental Congress. In effect, the Congress was rendered deaf in terms of the activities being conducted on behalf of the revolution in Europe.


	...Pleased with Deane's initial success in obtaining French support for the American war effort, on 26 September 1776 the Continental Congress appointed an official Commission to France. It was composed of Franklin, Deane, and Arthur Lee, and American-born lawyer living in London, who was also a correspondent for the Committee of Secret Correspondence. The Commission officially opened in late December 1776, with Franklin as the de factor head of the mission. It was located in the Hotel de Valentinois, in the Paris suburb of Passy.

	Unfortunately, there were serious personality clashes in the Commission. The split within the Commission was clear from the start--Franklin and Deane against Lee. Personal and business rivalries existed, and the sometimes brittle emotional personalities of the individuals made for an unpleasant environment.

	This situation provided British intelligence with opportunities to manipulate the three commissioners and the working environment within the Commission. Had mutual trust and respect existed, the Commission might have been more aware of the behavior of its employees and looked more objectively at why the British were so well informed of its plans and activities. According to an American historian:

		From 1776 to 1781, it is not too much to say that the British Foreign Office was far better informed of the American activities than was Congress itself. Franklin's embassy at Passy, it now appears, was almost a branch office of the British Secret Service.


	Franklin's personal and professional dislike and distrust of Lee stodd in the way of giving objective consideration to Lee's suspicions regarding Bancroft's activities, about which he started warning Franklin in early 1777.



https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Franklin/01-28-02-0408#BNFN-01-28-02-0408-fn-0004
	Arthur Lee to Franklin and John Adams: Two Letters, 7 February 1779

	(I) and (II) LS:6 American Philosophical Society
	I.

	Chaillot. Feb. 7th. 1779—

	Gentlemen.

	I have been informd that Dr. Bancroft is soon to go to England,7 charg’d with a Comission from us, or which concerns the trust, which is jointly repos’d in us. I beg the favor of you to inform me whether this is true. I have the honor to be, with the greatest esteem & respect Gentlemen, Your mst. obedient Hble Servt.

	Arthur Lee

	Hon. B. Franklin & John Adams. Esqs.

	Addressed: Honble. B. Franklin & John Adams Esqrs. / Ministers plenipotentiary / at Passi—
	II.

	Chaillot. Feb. 7th. 1779—

	Gentlemen.

	To a written Letter, one of you was civil enough to return me a verbal answer, that Docter Bancroft was appointed to transact business for us in England, & that his instructions should be sent to me.8

	Why you shoud think that in the choice of a person to represent us, I shoud have no voice; I am at a loss to conceive.

	The notorious character of Dr. Bancroft as a Stock-jobber is perfectly known to you.9 The dishonor of his transactions in that way, having been visited upon the Commissioners you also know. His living in open defiance of decency & religion you are no strangers to;1 nor to his enmity against me, & the constant means he employs to calumniate my character. You know also that he is the creature and Agent of that Mr. Deane, who has just publishd a most false & scandalous libel against Congress and some of their Servants; which, in the opinion of all person’s of honor whom I have heard speak of it, is likely to injure the affairs of the United States in Europe, and greatly disgrace our national character.

	For these reasons I should have imagind that Dr. Bancroft woud have been the last person in the World you would have chosen to represent us, or to vest with public Confidence. There are, most certainly in Paris, americans of untainted Reputation & undoubted abilities, who I am sure woud be willing to undertake any Commission from us for the service of their Country.

	I have farther to inform you as one of your Colleagues, that I have evidence in my possession, which makes me consider Dr. Bancroft as a Criminal with regard to the United States, & that I shall have him chargd as such, whenever he goes within their jurisdiction.2

	If after consideration of these reasons, and of this information, you shoud still be of opinion he is a proper person to represent us; you will give me leave by this letter to dissent from, and wash my hands of, his appointment.

	I have the honor to be, with the greatest esteem & respect, Gentlemen Your most obedient Humble Servant

	Arthur Lee

	Honble. B. Franklin, and John Adams Esqrs.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Bancroft
	On July 14, 1763, after fleeing his apprenticeship, Bancroft left New England for the sugar-producing slave colonies of Dutch Guiana, where he became a plantation doctor.[4][5][2] He soon expanded his practice to multiple plantations and wrote a study of the local environment. ...with the encouragement of Benjamin Franklin, he embarked on a career as a man of letters.[8] Bancroft later wrote extensively about the chemistry of dyes, based in part on his work in Dutch Guiana, contrasting non-European dyeing techniques unfavorably with the learned "philosophical chemistry" of natural philosophers like himself.

	In London, Bancroft's Natural History of Guiana (1769) attracted the attention of Paul Wentworth, New Hampshire's colonial agent in London, who hired Bancroft to survey Wentworth's plantation in Surinam and make recommendations for more efficient operation. Bancroft spent two months there before returning to London. While in Surinam, Bancroft wrote a three-volume, semi-autobiographical novel, The History of Charles Wentworth, Esq. The epistolary novel, which follows the life of a plantation owner (with the same surname as his friend and employer), imitates Voltaire's Candide and reflects Bancroft's deistic beliefs, ridiculing passages in the Bible and criticizing Christianity for its "detestable spirit of intolerance and persecution."


	...Spying for the Americans in London

	When the Committee of Secret Correspondence sent Silas Deane (Bancroft's former teacher) to France in 1776; Franklin instructed Deane to contact Bancroft, believing he would be a source of useful information. ...Bancroft met with Deane on July 8 and learned that Deane's purpose in France was to win French aid for the Americans against Britain. While Bancroft declined the invitation to attend negotiations, he did serve as Deane's assistant and interpreter. Deane's negotiations resulted in France sending some supplies to the Americans.[14]

	Deane told Bancroft that American leaders hoped to embroil Britain in a war against other foes (specifically, an alliance of France and Prussia), which they hoped would distract Britain. Though Deane and other Americans thought France would form an alliance, the ploy came to nothing. Nevertheless, it greatly troubled Bancroft. On July 26, 1776, Bancroft returned to London, assuring Deane that he would spy for the colonies.[2] In London, Bancroft sent copies of recent newspapers and pamphlets on current affairs and long letters to Deane to keep the Americans informed about the thinking of the British government and people.	...In December 1776 Bancroft was visited by the arsonist, John the Painter, after he had set a fire near the Portsmouth dock. Bancroft refused to give him any assistance.[16]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_the_Painter
	James Aitken (1752 – 10 March 1777), also known as John the Painter, was a mercenary who committed acts of sabotage in Royal Navy naval dockyards in during the American Revolutionary War in 1776–77.

	...Upon leaving school at age 14, he tried his hand at a variety of low-paying trades, including painter apprenticeship in 1767,[2] before finding that the world of criminal activity offered him more immediate rewards. He admitted in his testament to being a highwayman, burglar, shoplifter, robber, and (on at least one occasion) a rapist:

    	...I made the best of my way through Winchester to Basingstoke, intending to return to London. Going over a down near Basingstoke, I saw a girl watching some sheep, upon whom, with some threats and imprecations, I committed a rape, to my shame it be said.[3]

    Career as a saboteur

    Fearful that his crimes would soon be detected, Aitken negotiated an indenture in exchange for a voyage to Jamestown, Virginia. ...he became exposed to revolutionary rhetoric, and Aitken claimed that he had been harassed by British troops for being a suspected Whig.[4] At some point after a 1775 return trip to England he developed his scheme of political arson.

	...Aitken returned to England with Deane's instruction to meet the American expatriate, spy, and double-agent Edward Bancroft; Aitken disclosed to him at least some of his intentions. Using his training with mixing chemicals and paint solvents from his trade as a painter, Aitken solicited the help of several others in constructing crude incendiary devices with the intention of burning down the highly flammable buildings in the Royal Dockyards. Over the course of several months Aitken attacked facilities in Portsmouth and Bristol, creating the impression that a band of saboteurs was on the loose in England.[1]

	...Aitken's exploits, though only marginally successful at causing actual damage, did succeed in generating a significant amount of panic among the British public and government. 


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Bancroft
	...Spying for the British

	...In London he met Paul Wentworth, recently recruited by the British Secret Service. Wentworth arranged for Bancroft to meet Secret Service chief William Eden and Lords Suffolk and Weymouth, where Bancroft agreed to become a spy for Britain.

	...Soon after this, Franklin arrived to take over the negotiations with France. Bancroft was ordered to associate himself with Franklin. Fortuitously, Franklin appointed Bancroft as secretary to the American Commission in Paris. 

	...between the lines of the cover text, Bancroft wrote his reports in a special ink. Every Tuesday after 9:30 PM, he put the letter in a bottle, tied a string around it, and left it in a hole in a certain box tree in Paris.[2] A British official retrieved the message and replaced it with new orders. Bancroft would return later that night to recover the bottle. Through this method, George III may have seen the French-American Treaty of Alliance just two days after it was signed.[2] 

	...Death of Silas Deane

	After the death of former American diplomat Silas Deane in 1789 aboard a ship about to sail to America, Bancroft suggested in a private conversation that Deane had committed suicide. The following year an anonymous pamphlet, Theodosius, attacked the scientist and clergyman Joseph Priestley by claiming that while dying, Deane had uttered blasphemous and atheistic statements that he had supposedly derived from Priestley. Priestley, who had never met Deane, pleaded with Bancroft to set the record straight. Bancroft responded by publishing in several newspapers an account provided by the ship's captain, which stated that Deane had become suddenly ill and had been unable to say anything comprehensible during the four hours before his death.[26]

	In 1959, historian Julian Boyd suggested that Bancroft might have poisoned Deane, then spread rumors that Deane had committed suicide in an attempt to cover up the murder.[27] In the years since Boyd's articles appeared, his thesis has been largely dismissed as "ungrounded conjectures"; nevertheless, the theory has been widely publicized in a popular American textbook: James West Davidson and Mark Hamilton Lytle, After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection (Boston: McGraw Hill, 1982 [sixth edition, 2010]).[28][29]


http://dcmumma.weebly.com/uploads/3/8/1/1/38118559/strange_case_of_silas_deane.pdf
	The Strange Death of Silas Deane


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Bancroft
	...Franklin's possible knowledge of Bancroft's intrigue

	On January 19, 1777, Franklin wrote to Juliana Ritchie, a woman living in a Benedictine convent in Cambrai, that even if he suspected his valet to be a spy, "as he probably is, I think I should not discharge him for that, if in other Respects I lik'd him."[2][23] Although some historians believe the letter indicates Franklin's suspicion of Bancroft, others have noted that after the war, Franklin remained on good terms with Bancroft while he shunned other Loyalists, including his own son, William.[24] The vast majority of historians reject the thesis that Franklin was in any way disloyal to the United States.[25]


https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Franklin/01-23-02-0096
	To Benjamin Franklin from Juliana Ritchie, 12 January 1777
	From Juliana Ritchie4

	ALS: American Philosophical Society

	Cambray 12th Janry. 1777.

	Sir

	The agreeable manner in which I lived for several years in the (once happy) Citty of Philadelphia made too deep an impression upon my mind for either time, distance or the vicissitudes of fortune to erase; you will not be surprised, Sir, after this declaration, when I inform you that the unhappy situation of the affairs of America, has caus’d me to pass many Days in painful anxiety, and sleepless nights since the commencement of the present warr with England, hopeing and fearing alternately, for the safety of the country in General but more perticulerly for the fate of those whom repeated acts of friendship and kindness rendered truely dear to my heart. It is from these sentiments that I take the liberty of addressing you Sir, being fully perswaded (from the knowledge I have of your amiable character) that you will not only pardon the freedom I am now takeing, but will allso keep the purport of this letter from the knowledge of any other Person, or otherwise I shall be involved in great trouble. But I am quite easy upon that head, knowing that it is to a Gentleman of integrity I am writeing, and therfore without further preface, I proceed to the purpose of this letter, which is to inform you Sir, that you are Surrounded with Spies, who watch your every movement who you Visit, and by whom you are visited. Of the latter there are who pretend to be friends to the cause of your country but that is a mere pretence. Your own good sence will easilly infer the motive of their conduct. One Party assures that you are seeking aid and support from this Kingdom the other Party insinuate that you have given up that Cause and are makeing the best terms you can for the private advantage of your own family connections &c. I dare not be more explicit for weighty reasons to my self, but of the truth of what I inform you, you may strictly rely. As I am ignorant of your address I send this to Messrs. Le Normond & Co. Rue St. Honory to deliver to your own hand, and shall rejoice to know that you have received it safe. If at your leisure you favor me with a few lines, please to address me at Cambrai. That address will be sufficient as I have resided here for two years with five young Ladies of fortune (Doughters to my perticuler friends in England) who are all under my Care. We return to England in the spring season,5 where if I can render you any acceptable service, to know your Commands will give me real pleasure. I make no doubt but you have many abler friends, but I am sure none more willing then my self. I hope you left Mrs. Franklin and your Do[ughter] well, an account whereof will give me pleasure.

	I had a letter from my husband a few Days since, but He does not mention the affairs of America.6I have the honor to be with great esteem Sir your humble Servant

	Juliana Ritchie


https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Franklin/01-23-02-0125
	From Benjamin Franklin to [Juliana Ritchie], 19 January 1777
	To [Juliana Ritchie7]

	ALS (draft): American Philosophical Society

	Paris, Jan. 19. 1777.

	Madam,

	I am much oblig’d to you for your kind Attention to my Welfare, in the Information you give me. I have no doubt of its being well founded. But as it is impossible to discover in every case the Falsity of pretended Friends who would know our Affairs; and more so to prevent being watch’d by Spies, when interested People may think proper to place them for that purpose; I have long observ’d one Rule which prevents any Inconvenience from such Practices. It is simply this, to be concern’d in no Affairs that I should blush to have made publick; and to do nothing but what Spies may see and welcome. When a Man’s Actions are just and honourable, the more they are known, the more his Reputation is increas’d and establish’d. If I was sure therefore that my Valet de Place was a Spy, as probably he is,8 I think I should not discharge him for that, if in other Respects I lik’d him.

	The various Conjectures you mention concerning my Business here, must have their Course. They amuse those that make them, and some of those that hear them; they do me no harm, and therefore it is not necessary that I should take the least Pains to rectify them. I am glad to learn that you are in a Situation that is agreeable to you, and that Mr. Richie was lately well. My Daughter and her Children were so when I left them, but I have lost my dear Mrs. Franklin now two Years since. I have the Honour to be very respectfully Madam, Your most obedient humble Servant

	BF


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000872649.pdf
	...which he started warning Franklin in early 1777.

	The French were quick to notice the lack of unity among the American commissioners, and Bancroft made sure that British intelligence was aware of the personality conflicts.

	British intelligence collected personality assessment data on all the commissioners and had excellent profiles on Franklin and Lee from their time in England. The British would have used this information to decide the best type of access agents to send against each target, and their knowledge of Franklin's and Deane's conflict with Lee should have enabled them to shape further their elicitation and manipulation activities.

	...Bancroft, at Wentworth's direction, traveled to Paris in January 1777 and further ingratiated himself with Deane and Franklin. On returning to Britain, he expressed confidence that he could obtain a position within the Commission. This suited British intelligence, and a cover story was created to justify Bancroft's move to Paris. This cover story related to the 15 March publication in the London Chronicle of John the Painter's confession. The confession included the fact that Deane had given John a letter for Bancroft, and that John had told Bancroft of his activities. In reality, Bancroft published a response to these charges in the London press, and no threat to him existed. Deane and Franklin, however, readily accepted Bancroft's statement that he no longer felt safe in England. Surprisingly, the French, who had agents keeping an eye on the Americans, also believed the cover story.


	...While Bancroft was reporting from inside the Commission, British intelligence was busy recruiting American access agents to send against the commissioners. The recruiting officer was Rev. John Vardill, and American Anglican clergyman and a former assistant rector of Trinity Church in New York City. He worked for British intelligence from 1775 to 1781, reporting on American sympathizers and recruiting Americans. Two Americans he recruited were targeted against the Commission: a businessman named Jacobus Van Zandt (who reported under the pseudonym Geroge Lupton) and Capt. Joseph Hynson, a Maryland sea captain.

	Van Zandt, the son of a wealthy New york merchant, was living well above his means in paris, and he had numerous bad depts. ...Vardill recruited him by providing funds to pay off Van Zandt's depts. He then directed Van Zandt to befriend Deane, who was always on the alert for a profitable business deal.

	...Deane often invited him into his living quarters, and Van Zandt stole various documents which Deane kept there. ...Much of what he reported from Deane was also being reported by Bancroft, and his information was a useful cross check on the latter's reporting. At least one piece of Van Zandt's reporting proved to be of significant operational value to the British: he was able to provide a list of the cover names and addresses used by the Commission to correspond with its contacts in Britain.

	...Vardill had better luck with Captain Hynson, who managed to befriend Franklin and Deane for over six months. Hynson was originally spotted by his British girl friend and her landlady in London, after he boasted of being tasked to obtain an English ship to sail to America for transfer to the American Navy. He also bragged that he would be carrying secret correspondence from the American commissioners in paris to the Continental Congress. Vardill recruited him, using a combination of threats and financial rewards, specifically to obtain the official correspondence that he was to carry back to America. Some historians believe this was part of a British intelligence operational testing scheme to vet Bancroft's copies of Commission correspondence.


https://loyalist.lib.unb.ca/atlantic-loyalist-connections/silas-deane-secret-agent-france
	In 1777, Deane procured the services of Captain Joseph Hynson, who would ensure that the secret documents were safely transported to the United States. However, unbeknownst to Deane, sometime after being hired to work for the American Commissioners in France, Hynson had come into contact with a British agent who persuaded him to work as a double agent for England; apparently, Hynson was mainly concerned with making a lot of money, regardless of who “signed the cheques”. Thus, a plan was organized in which Hynson was to deliver the despatches to the British once they were ready to be shipped out; but, in a last minute change of plans, Deane chose a Captain Folger to transport the documents to America while instructing Hynson to command a brig in western France. Acting quickly while Folger was distracted, Hynson removed the despatches from their packet and replaced them with blank papers. The next day, Folger set sail for America while Hynson fled to England.

	Upon being informed that Hynson went to England, Deane assumed he had defected; Deane’s thoughts were reflected in a letter he wrote to Jonathan Williams, an American military engineer: “The wrong-headed, conceited Fool [Hynson] has at last turned out one of the most ungrateful of Traitors…has fled into England, there to help himself by telling all & much more than he had knowledge of”.

	However, Deane had not yet realized that Hynson had stolen the secret documents: “It is fortunate for us that he knows nothing…it is hoped that his new Patrons will believe everything he invents to serve himself.” (Silas Deane and Charles Isham, The Deane Papers, New York, NY: New-York Historical Soc., 1891.)


https://books.google.com/books?id=A8WoNp2vI-cC&pg=PA383&lpg=PA383
	Returning to Paris, Hynson was shunned by all the Americans except Carmichael, who reportedly told him that the French knew of his going to England and had accused the commissioners of sending him there for their own diplomatic purposes. Eden soon relieved the Unhappy Hynson from spy duties


https://loyalist.lib.unb.ca/atlantic-loyalist-connections/silas-deane-secret-agent-france
	Finally, in yet another act of betrayal, Hynson wrote to Deane offering to supply him with information regarding the British. Fed up with his selfish and backstabbing ways, Deane replied to Hynson with a brief, harsh letter that put an end to their correspondence.

	Letter from Silas to Captain Joseph Hynson, terminating their relationship.

	“I do not write you to reproach you for the ungrateful and treacherous past you have acted; --I leave this to your own Reflections, but as you have had the—Assurance to write to me, & to propose the betraying your new Patrons, in the manner you have wickedly but in vain attempted to betray our form, & with them your Country, I must tell you that no Letters from you will hereafter be received by
	Deane”

	Following the Revolutionary War, both Deane’s reputation and wealth declined; he was accused of financial impropriety while the value of investments he had made plummeted. Ultimately, Deane lived in Europe for much of the remainder of his life. He succumbed to an unknown illness and died in September 1789 in Great Britain. 



https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000872649.pdf
	...Hynson's contributions to British intelligence included military shipping information and American plans to purchase European ships for American use. His sources of information were Deane and Franklin; American sea captains involved in moving supplies and vessels to the colonies; and William Carmichael, an assistant to both Franklin and Deane.

	...William Carmichael, a source of Hynson's and a probably recruitment target of the British, was an American businessman from Maryland residing in Europe who volunteered to help the Commission in a clerical position. He served as an assistant to both Deane and Franklin from late 1776 through 1777.

	...He also had a mistress in London who lived in the same house as Hynson's mistress.

	There is no firm evidence that Carmichael was under British control, but he told Hynson of activities at the commission and details of American shipping and privateering plans, knowing that Hynson was passing this information to the British.

	...Carmichael also wrote detailed letters of the activites at the Commission to his girl friend in London. British intelligence intercepted these letters, and one might suspect that his mistress may have been encouraged to ask the right questions to keep the information flowing. His gossipy letters produced valuable assessment and operational information for British intelligence.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Carmichael_(diplomat)
	William Carmichael (c. 1739–1795) was an American statesman and diplomat from Maryland during and after the Revolutionary War. He participated in Benjamin Franklin's mission to Paris in 1776-8, represented Maryland in the Continental Congress in 1778 and 1779 and was the principal diplomat for the United States to Spain from 1782 to 1794.

	...In 1776 the Congress named Carmichael as a Secret Agent, first as an assistant to Silas Deane. He is credited with befriending the Marquis de Lafayette and recruiting the teenage aristocrat to the American cause

	...Carmichael clashed repeatedly with many of his fellow countrymen, particularly Arthur Lee and John Jay


https://books.google.com/books?id=tA8kivgMZnkC&pg=PA235&lpg=PA235
	...Gouverneur Morris to John Jay
	...May1782

	...Some arrangements now before Congress will I think be agreable to you. You tell me but *happy shall I be to see the day when I shall no mor[e] be plauged his tricks.* 4

	4. The words in italics denote material in manuscript written in Office of Finance Cipher no. 1. ...the enciphered passage was a quotation from Jay's September 28 letter and was encoded there. Excised material in that letter indicates that the reference is to William Carmichael, secretary to the American mission in Spain, a man whom Jay greatly distrusted and privately suspected of being a British spy.


https://books.google.com/books?id=lqXqCQAAQBAJ&pg=PA126&lpg=PA126
	...In fact, Franklin's intimates Silas Deane, Edward Bancroft, and William Carmichael, the comission secretary, were in the pay of the British secret service. Chaumont, who donated Franklin's house, was a partner with Franklin, along with Deane and Bancroft, in an old scheme to buy up western lands in America. In Nates, Franklin's grandnephew, also a British spy, managed the privateering speculations in which Franklin, Deane, and Bancroft were involved.



https://msuweb.montclair.edu/~furrg/fc/deacononfranklin.html
	Famous British Historian Claims Benjamin Franklin Was A British Spy

	By Richard Deacon, author of "A History of the British Secret Service," as told to Tom McMorrow.

	(Originally published in Argosy magazine, July 1970, pp. 34 ff).


	...Benjamin Franklin, an agent of the British Crown? That homespun Philadelphia philosopher? One might as well call Whistler’s Mother a Madam.

	If that be so, Madam Whistler it is, henceforward, because the Honorable Mr. Franklin was referred to in dispatches of the British Secret service during the Revolution as "Number 72."

	In doing research for his book, "A History of the British Secret Service," the co-author of this article uncovered that almost unacceptable fact in the Service’s eighteenth-century records.

	Standing alone, such a statement would be unworthy of publication, but the discovery of this startling bit of intelligence has led to a re-examination of all possibly pertinent documents in search of corroborating or contradictory evidence, and every fact turned up points to one conclusion: Benjamin Franklin was a double agent, working hand in hand with the British arch-spy, Edward Bancroft, during the Revolutionary years when he was America’s Ambassador to France.

	"So great is his [Franklin’s] reputation, that almost no modern writer has undertaken to question the uprightness of his actions, or failed to accept his testimony at face value," wrote T.P. Abernethy in his account of the controversial relationship between Franklin and Arthur Lee of his Embassy. "Such historical practice is, of course, not justifiable."

	Abernethy went on to counsel "a discarding of hero worship," and to suggest that "a careful weighing of all contemporary evidence would produce a conclusion quite different from that which has been reached."

	The scholar did not, however, pursue such evidence further, and his wise admonition has, like most good advice, been respected and generally ignored ever since.

	The only research done on the subject in recent years has been on the part of various American university professors, out to disprove the / 36 / allegation that Franklin belonged to the notorious Hell-Fire Club in London in the early 1770s. They failed to reach a firm conclusion, and the evidence on the British side of the Atlantic points conclusively to his membership in the strange secret society.

	Let us open the presentation of our case by listing the documented associations and other items of evidence that go to support our contention that the author of such prim homilies as "Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise" was much more than the "rustic philosopher" a leading encyclopedia calls him – was, indeed, a master of international intrigue and espionage:

	    Close friendship with Lord le Despencer, founder of Hell-Fire, a society of libertines which British Intelligence used as a cover.
	    Use of the pseudonym, "Brother Benjamin of Cookham."
	    Association with the Chevalier d’Eon de Beaumont, a spectacularly successful French secret agent (who usually posed as a woman).
	    Membership in a firm of land speculators chartered by the British Government, retained during the Revolution.
	    Protests by both French and American diplomats that every move of the Americans in Paris during the Revolution was known by the English Ambassador.
	    Existence inside Franklin’s American Embassy of a cell of British Intelligence agents organized by his chief assistant, Bancroft.
	    The fact that copies of most of Franklin’s reports to America during the Revolution are in the British Archives.
	    Certain memoranda from the British diplomat, Richard Oswald, from Paris to his government in London.
	    Franklin’s rejection of espionage charges against Bancroft – a man characterized by King George III himself as a double agent – refusal to investigate those charges and denunciation of the man who made them.
	    Documents in the British Museum revealing that Franklin passed on to London information about American shipping.

	John Adams, whose theatrical shade capers nightly on the Broadway stage in a comic dance with Franklin and Thomas Jefferson in "1776," either was not that chummy with old Ben, or soured on him during the Revolution, as attested by his words at the time of the peace negotiations: "Franklin’s cunning will be to divide us; to this end,, he will provoke, he will insinuate, he will intrigue, he will maneuver."

	...And Ben was indisputably a man. Consider this, from his pen, in 1748, when he was thirty-nine:

        "Fair Venus calls; her voice obey;
        In Beauty’s arms spend night and day
        The joys of love all joys excell
        And loving’s certainly doing well."

	Yes, the Presbyterian moralist undeniably enjoyed the pleasures of the flesh as a man of his giant vitality must be expected to, and in that connection the question of his membership in the Hell-Fire Club arises.

	The society was founded by Lord le Despencer, better known under his previous title of Sir Francis Dashwood, briefly Chancellor of the Exchequer and a notorious rakehell. It was muttered in the taverns that the members practised black magic, but this was a belief those jaded sophisticates fostered among the ignorant for their own amusement. The rites of Satan worship in which they indulged were in the nature of a hoax and were never taken seriously.

	The fraternity, whose members were known as the Knights of St. Francis of Wycombe, had its deadly serious aspect, however. British Intelligence found the setup ideal as a cover for meetings, and its agents gathered at Wycombe periodically in the guise of idle revelers.

	In 1773, when he was in England acting as agent for / 60 / the Colonies of Georgia, New Jersey and Massachusetts, Franklin wrote to his son in America:

	"I am in this house as much at my ease as if it was my own; and the gardens are a paradise. But a pleasanter thing is the kind countenance, the facetious and very intellectual conversation of Mine Host, who, having been for many years engaged in public affairs, seen all parts of Europe, and kept the best company in the world, is himself the best existing."

	That host was Lord le Despencer, the homelike domicile was West Wycombe House, and the gardens Franklin described as paradisiacal were decorated with phallic statuary and laid out in patterns of erotic symbolism so flagrant that a later generation had the entire layout razed to the ground.

	West Wycombe Church stood on a hill nearby, and in some caves beneath it, the Hell-Fire Club met, the male members, known as "monks," dressed in vari-colored habits, the females, or "nuns," in white habits and masks. A society rule stipulated that the ladies "consider themselves as the lawful wives of the Brethren during their stay within monastic walls."

	"The rites of the Knights of Wycombe," an historian has said, "were of a nature subversive of all decency."

	Was Ben but obeying the voice of the "fair Venus" he had extolled in rhyme many years before, in his association with the naughty Knights? If so, we should be ashamed to intrude on the old gentleman’s privacy, but then there is the impressive list of high-ranking British officials who were members of the society. It included the First Lord of the Admiralty, the Paymaster-General, a former Prime Minister, three members of Parliament, and former Chancellor of the Exchequer le Despencer. Even Frederick, the Prince of Wales, was reputed to be a member.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellfire_Club
	Hellfire Club was a name for several exclusive clubs for high society rakes established in Britain and Ireland in the 18th century. The name is most commonly used to refer to Sir Francis Dashwood's Order of the Friars of St. Francis of Wycombe.[1] Such clubs were rumoured to be the meeting places of "persons of quality"[2] who wished to take part in socially perceived immoral acts, and the members were often involved in politics.


a psycopath club?


	...At the time of the London gentlemen's club, where there was a meeting place for every interest, including poetry, philosophy and politics,[12][13] Philip, Duke of Wharton's Hell-Fire Club was, according to Blackett-Ord,[14] a satirical "gentleman's club" which was known to ridicule religion, catching onto the then-current trend in England of blasphemy.[12][15] The club was more a joke, meant to shock the outside world, than a serious attack on religion or morality. The supposed president of this club was the Devil, although the members themselves did not apparently worship demons or the Devil, but called themselves devils.[16] Wharton's club admitted men and women as equals, unlike other clubs of the time.[15] The club met on Sundays at a number of different locations around London. The Greyhound Tavern was one of the meeting places used regularly, but because women were not to be seen in taverns, the meetings were also held at members' houses and at Wharton's riding club.[5][15][17]

	According to at least one source, their activities included mock religious ceremonies and partaking in meals containing dishes like "Holy Ghost Pie", "Breast of Venus", and "Devil's Loin", while drinking "Hell-fire punch".[5][18] Members of the Club supposedly came to meetings dressed as characters from the Bible.[18]

	...The club motto was Fais ce que tu voudras (Do what thou wilt), a philosophy of life associated with François Rabelais' fictional abbey at Thélème[7][23] and later used by Aleister Crowley.


weird about religion kindof like Nietzche


https://msuweb.montclair.edu/~furrg/fc/deacononfranklin.html
	The closeness of Franklin’s relationship with le Despencer is further demonstrated by the fact that they co-authored a "Revised Book of Common Prayer" for the Church of England.

	Franklin’s satirical wit comes through in their description of the prayer book’s aims: "To prevent the old and faithful from freezing to death through long ceremonies in cold churches, to make the services so short as to attract the young and lively, and to relieve the well-disposed from the infliction of interminable prayers."


	...The Hell-Fire member with the most spectacular reputation among the initiate was the Chevalier d’Eon de Beaumont, a French spy as skilled in the devious arts of his profession as any character of fiction.

	One of his triumphs was scored when he was sent to the Russian court in the guise of a French noblewoman, the vivacious "mademoiselle Lia de Beaumont." Not content with deceiving the Russians with his transvestite performance to the point where he was picking up intelligence on court intrigues, d’Eon, with the boldness of a great spy, applied for the post of lady-in-waiting to the Czarina – and got it.

	The Philadelphia philosopher and the Chevalier became friends in the early 1770s, when the French master spy was assigned to London, and promptly joined the Hell-Fire club. Recognizing their mutual interest, they maintained close contact through secret intermediaries. D’Eon, who had powerful enemies at court, gave Franklin information on political intrigues in exchange for briefings on French affairs and secret plans to be passed on to the English.

	...Arthur Lee, whom Franklin described in a letter to Joseph Reed, in 1780, as a man to beware of – "for in sowing suspicions and jealousies .. in malice, subtlety and indefatigable industry, he has, I think, no equal" – gave his Ambassador good cause to speak ill of him. Along with his charges that the Embassy was a nest of spies, he was convinced that Franklin and Silas Dean, former agent for Massachusetts, had used for their own purposes funds provided by the Continental Congress. The Lee Papers reveal this in his letter to Richard Henry Lee, dated September 12, 1778.

	Was Franklin contrite in the face of these charges, or did he, indeed, offer any defense of his actions? Not at all. When he returned to America, a Congressional Committee was appointed to examine his accounts, which showed a deficit of 100,000 pounds.

	Old Ben’s retort was a classic. "I was taught as a boy to read the Scriptures and to attend to them," he told the Congressmen in what was doubtless the orotund tones of an eighteenth-century Everett Dirksen, "and it said there: ‘Muzzle not the ox that treadeth out his master’s grain.’"



from The Hellfire Clubs: Sex, Satanism and Secret Societies Introduction:

	The scene is the House of Lords, the date is May 1721. A peer, with a bible in his pocket and an expression of piety on his face, stands up to speak. He is a handsome fellow, young and upright; his voice is clear and rights out with sincerity, or so it seems to some of his listeners. He says he is glad of the chance to justify himself 'by declaring that he is far from being a patron of blasphemy or an enemy of religion', but he could not support a bill which he considered to be repugnant to Holy Scripture. Taking the family bible from his pocket, he treats his listeners to several passages from the Epistles of Saints Peter and Paul, and concludes that the bill should be thrown out.

	The bill he was arguing about was the Bill to Prevent Blashphemy and Profaneness, and it was aimed at supressing a 'scandalous society with the name of the Hell-Fire Club'. The speaker was the twenty-three-year-old Philip, Duke of Wharton, the alleged founder and patron of the club.

	London in the spring of 1721 was abuzz with rumors of highborn Devil-worshippers who mocked the established Church and religion, and allegedly supped with Satan--rumors which went as far as the ears of the King, George I, and resulted in a royal proclimation against such clubs, and the aforesaid bill being put into Parliament. What did the hell-fire clubs represent, and why was there such an outcry against these organisations?

	The hell-fire clubs represented an enduring fascination with the forbidden fruit offered by the Devil, and a continuing flirtation with danger and the unknown. These clubs issued a challenge to Satan to make himself known, and a challenge to the Church and the ethics of society to prevent this. The members of such clubs were on a mission for excitement; they wanted sensual delights, sexual plesure, and an alternative to religion.


So it was some freaky satanist sex-club?

	
	They hit out at the moral code of Christian society, and questioned the conventional teachings of the established Church. But the members of these clubs faced a dilemma: if they believed in Satan and hell-fire, did they by implication believe in a supernatural being called God, and a place called Heaven? The Hell-Fire Club members of 1721 denied that they were athiests, but were they, in fact, reaffirming Christian theology by mocking outdated superstitions? They belonged to an age that sought to demystify death and challenge the superstituions surounding death. For hell-fire club members Hell was a mere invention designed to frighten sinners and send them down the paths of righteousness.


getting real Nietzche-vibe


	However, for most members of these clubs their aims were neither intellectual nor theological. Instead they were seeking to shock society, cause havoc and, first and foremost, have a good time.


and start a few world wars along the way!



http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-northern-ireland-37609835
	Digging up the truth about the notorious hellfire clubs

	...Hell-fire clubs have always been shrouded in rumours of devil worship and dark satanic deeds. How do you separate fact from fiction?

	...But a few clubs crossed the line into sex, blasphemy and sheer bloody badness - or so the rumour goes.

	The first hellfire club was set up by the Duke of Wharton and specialised in daring deeds like playing cards on Sunday, reading Lucretius and eating pigeon - known as "Holy Ghost" - pie, as chronicled in The Hellfire Clubs: Sex, Satanism and Secret Societies by Evelyn Lord.

	The most notorious club was formed by Sir Francis Dashwood with the motto "Fais ce que tu voudrais" - Do as you will.

	Dashwood's club included some of Britain's most senior statesmen and aristocrats. They met in a series of underground caves in West Wycombe and, legend has itindulged in lot of risque behaviour with the strict proviso: "What goes on underground, stays underground."

	His club was called the Monks or Friars of St Francis of Wycombe. It was anything but saintly and involved drinking, wenching and banqueting.

	Later, there were suggestions of ritual abuse of women and Black Masses - but perhaps people with an axe to grind would be keen to spread such rumours.

	Aisling Tierney, from Limerick, who has just finished a PhD in Bristol on the hellfire clubs, has been working on untangling the web of rumour and gossip and establishing the archaeological truth.

	...But there was a much darker side to the club - it was a place where young rich aristocrats could get away, literally, with murder.

	"When we come to one of the club's younger members, Henry, fourth Baron Barry of Santry, things start to get more sinister," writes Ryan.

	"Lord Santry was civil enough - when sober. When intoxicated, as he often was, a much darker side was revealed. One of his most shocking crimes was the murder of an ill and bedridden servant. Having forced the unfortunate man to drink a bottle of brandy, Santry drenched his bedclothes in alcohol and set them alight, burning him alive. He escaped punishment by buying the silence of witnesses."

	And out of dirty deeds like this, the hellfire club got its gory reputation and cast a long shadow down the years.



https://msuweb.montclair.edu/~furrg/fc/deacononfranklin.html
	England’s infamous Hell-Fire club, a band of orgy-loving rakes, doubled as the center of British espionage during the American Revolution. 


https://books.google.com/books?id=LK3MReWSr9wC&pg=PT309&lpg=PT309
	Franklin: The Essential Founding Father
	By James Srodes

	...A History of the British Secret Service (New York: Taplinger, 1969). Note: Deacon is the pen name of the British intelligence writer Donald McCormick, whois the author, in his own name, of The Hell-Fire Club (London: Jerrold's, 1958). As part of his proof that Franklin was recruited, Deacon in History asserts that the Dashwood "monks" were part of the secret service. But as McCormick he does not claim that Franklin was a British agent, nor do any other of the books on West Wycombe.


https://msuweb.montclair.edu/~furrg/fc/deacononfranklin.html
	...In doing research for his book, "A History of the British Secret Service," the co-author of this article uncovered that almost unacceptable fact in the Service’s eighteenth-century records...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Srodes
	Srodes' previous book is a multiple-biography titled On Dupont Circle: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt and the Progressives Who Shaped Our World that was published by Counterpoint Press in 2013. The book, which was a finalist for the Los Angeles Times history book award and also was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, portrays a group of reform-minded strivers in Washington, D.C. between World War I and World War II. This group included Herbert Hoover, William Bullitt, Felix Frankfurter, Walter Lippmann, Sumner Welles, John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, Eleanor Lansing Dulles, Eleanor Roosevelt and Franklin Roosevelt. According to the Washington Independent Review of Books, “James Srodes deftly portrays their colorful stories.


https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/sep/14/book-review-on-dupont-circle/
	...In “On Dupont Circle,” which traces the careers of a small group that would come to dominate American policy formation, he observes that “Anyone who reads much history has to be struck by how there are so few really important people involved in any great event What is so remarkable about our cast of a dozen young characters who assembled in the Dupont Circle neighborhood of Washington D.C. is how important they would remain to the history of what we call the American Century.”

	...But as Mr. Srodes puts it, “What is important to us today is how firmly they stayed constant to an overarching vision of a strong America that would guarantee social justice at home, install democracy in other nations and, above all, try to foster a world where peace — not war — was the norm.”

	“The world as it is today is our inheritance from these ambitious, flawed pioneers for peace. They are remarkable people, and it is a remarkable story.”


https://penandpension.com/2015/03/04/the-c18th-british-secret-service-under-pitt-2/
	There was no centralised system of secret surveillance. No MI5 or MI6. Instead, various officials in government ministries, the Admiralty and the Foreign Office collected and collated data, before producing reports. What is fascinating is the level of interest the King took in these reports, reading them every day and using them to send messages and instructions to his ministers and supporters. Like Churchill 150 years later, George needed no convincing about the importance of being well informed of his enemies’ intentions.

	While we can see that the Jacobite threat to the Hanoverian dynasty was over from the 1745 rebellion, it may not have been quite so plain at the time. The eighteenth century was, after all, the heyday of a mass of secret societies, from Hellfire Clubs and drinking and gambling clubs, to Freemasons, Catholic and post-Jacobite plotters, Illuminati, freethinkers and agitators for constitutional change. It seems at times that every Englishman of even a modest level of prosperity spent much of his free time in one club or another. And though most ranged from the benign to the somewhat silly, others did indeed seek the overthrow of the ruling class and the redistribution of wealth.
	Limited Evidence

	Until quite recently, most historians seems to have ignored or dismissed eighteenth-century espionage as something of a misnomer. Now we can see they were wrong. Of course, the nature of secret services is to stay secret, so evidence for their activities and arrangements is not likely to appear in plain print. However, if you forget the bias caused by assuming spying in the 1700s must look like the same thing in the 1900s, the evidence is there, especially in the King’s accounts and the Privy Purse – both fine places for large expenditures to be hidden from parliamentary scrutiny.

	That’s where the next post in this series will go: to the evidence for secret expenditure and the clandestine activities of agencies supposedly set up on a purely temporary basis during war-time, yet managing to persist well afterwards too.



------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benjamin_Franklin
	Decades in London

	From the mid 1750s to the mid 1770s, Franklin spent much of his time in London. Officially he was there on a political mission, but he used his time to further his scientific explorations as well, meeting many notable people.

	In 1757, he was sent to England by the Pennsylvania Assembly as a colonial agent to protest against the political influence of the Penn family, the proprietors of the colony. He remained there for five years, striving to end the proprietors' prerogative to overturn legislation from the elected Assembly, and their exemption from paying taxes on their land. His lack of influential allies in Whitehall led to the failure of this mission.

	At this time, many members of the Pennsylvania Assembly were feuding with William Penn's heirs, who controlled the colony as proprietors. After his return to the colony, Franklin led the "anti-proprietary party" in the struggle against the Penn family, and was elected Speaker of the Pennsylvania House in May 1764. His call for a change from proprietary to royal government was a rare political miscalculation, however: Pennsylvanians worried that such a move would endanger their political and religious freedoms. Because of these fears, and because of political attacks on his character, Franklin lost his seat in the October 1764 Assembly elections. The anti-proprietary party dispatched Franklin to England again to continue the struggle against the Penn family proprietorship. During this trip, events drastically changed the nature of his mission.[107]

	In London, Franklin opposed the 1765 Stamp Act. Unable to prevent its passage, he made another political miscalculation and recommended a friend to the post of stamp distributor for Pennsylvania. Pennsylvanians were outraged, believing that he had supported the measure all along, and threatened to destroy his home in Philadelphia. Franklin soon learned of the extent of colonial resistance to the Stamp Act, and he testified during the House of Commons proceedings that led to its repeal.[108]

	With this, Franklin suddenly emerged as the leading spokesman for American interests in England. He wrote popular essays on behalf of the colonies. Georgia, New Jersey, and Massachusetts also appointed him as their agent to the Crown.[107]


anything interesting going on here?