
good documentary if watched a certain way:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pXxoyk5wOo


like with this in mind:

http://xroads.virginia.edu/~ma01/Kidd/thesis/pdf/protocols.pdf
	WE SHALL END LIBERTY

	25. Far back in ancient times we were the first to cry among the masses of the people the words"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," words many times repeated since these days by stupid poll- parrots who, from all sides around, flew down upon these baits and with them carried away the well-being of the world, true freedom of the individual, formerly so well guarded against the pressure of the mob. 


also that French revolution ended up with things like new revolutionary 10 day calendar which sounds like a joke


doc says he was going to read out a list of traitors before he died

-------


https://www.marxists.org/history/france/revolution/robespierre/1794/enemies.htm
	On the Enemies of the Nation

	Speech given from the tribune of the Convention;
	7 Prairial, Year II (May 26, 1794);
	Translated: for marxists.org by Mitch Abidor;
	CopyLeft: Creative Commons (Attribute & ShareAlike) marxists.org 2004.

	Citizens:

	It would be a beautiful subject for conversation for posterity; it’s already a spectacle worthy of heaven and Earth to see the Assembly of the people’s representatives placed upon the inexhaustible volcano of conspiracies bring to the feet of the Eternal Author of all things the homage of a great people with one hand, and, with the other, with the lives and the wrath of tyrants gathered against it, found the first republic in the world and recall exiled freedom, justice and nature among mortals.

	They will perish, all of the tyrants armed against the French people! They will perish, all the factions that rely upon their power in order to destroy our freedom. You will not make peace, but you will give it to the world, taking it from the hands of crime.

	This approaching prospect offered itself to the sight of the frightened tyrants, and they decided with their accomplices that the time had come to assassinate us; we, that is, the National Convention, for if they attack you now en masse and now individually you still recognize the same plan and the same enemies. Without a doubt they are not foolish enough to believe that the death of a few representatives can assure their triumph.

	If they believed, in fact, that in order to destroy your energy, or to change your principles, it was enough to assassinate those to whom you have especially confided the care of overseeing the salvation of the republic; if they believed that in throwing us into the tomb the spirits of Brissot, Hebert and Danton would emerge triumphant to deliver you a second time to discord, to the empire of factions and to the mercy of traitors, they were wrong.

	When we will have fallen under their blows, you would either complete your sublime enterprise or share our fate. Or rather, there is not one Frenchmen who would not want to stand over our bloody corpses to swear to exterminate the last of the enemies of the people.

	Nevertheless, their impious delirium attests both to their hope and their despair.

	They once hoped to succeed in starving the French people; the French people still lives and will survive all its enemies. Subsistence was assured, and nature, faithful to Liberty, already presents it abundance. What resource then remains to them? Assassination.

	They hoped to exterminate the national representation by bribed revolt, and they so counted on the success of this attack that they didn’t blush to announce it in advance to the wrath of Europe and to confess it in the English parliament. This project failed. What remains to them? Assassination.

	They thought they could overwhelm us by the efforts of their sacrilegious league, and especially by treason. The traitors tremble or perish, their artillery falls into our power, their satellites flee before us, but assassination remains to them.

	They sought to dissolve the National Convention by degradation and corruption. The Convention punished their accomplices and rose triumphant on the ruins of factions and under the aegis of the French people. But assassination remains to them.

	They attempted to deprave public morality and to extinguish the generous sentiments of which the love of freedom and of the fatherland are composed by banishing from the republic good sense, virtue and divinity. We proclaimed the divinity and the immortality of the soul; we commanded virtue in the name of the republic. Assassination remains to them.

	Finally, slander, treason, arson, poisoning, atheism, corruption, famine, assassinations. They were lavish with these crimes: assassination and yet more assassination still remain to them.

	Let us then rejoice and give thanks to heaven since we have so well served our country as to have been judged worthy of the daggers of tyranny.

	We thus have glorious dangers to run! The city offers as many such dangers as the battlefield. We have nothing to envy our brave brothers in arms; we pay, in more than one way, our debt to the fatherland.

	Oh kings and valets of kings! It is not we who will complain of the kind of war you make, and we recognize that it is worthy of your august prudence.

	In fact, it is easier to take our lives than to triumph over our principles and our armies. England, Italy, Germany, and France itself will furnish you soldiers to execute these noble exploits. When the powers of the earth league together to kill a feeble individual he must not insist on living; it is thus that living a long time doesn’t enter into our calculations. It’s not in order to live that we declare war on all tyrants and, what is even more dangerous, on all crimes.

	What man on earth has ever defended the rights of humanity with impunity?

	A few months ago I said to my colleagues on the Committee of Public Safety: “If the armies of the Republic are victorious, if we unmask the traitors, if we put down factions, they will assassinate us.” And I was not in the least astonished to see my prophecy realized. I myself find that the situation in which the enemies of the republic have placed me is not without its advantages, for the more uncertain and precarious are the lives of the defenders of the fatherland, the more independent they are of men’s evil.

	Surrounded by assassins I have already put myself in the new order of things where they want to send me. I only hold to fleeting life by the love of the fatherland and the thirst for justice and, separated more than ever from any personal considerations, I find myself better disposed to attack with energy the villains who conspire against us and humankind.

	The more they hurry to terminate my career down here, the more I hasten to fulfill those actions useful to the happiness of my like.

	At least I will leave a testament whose reading will make tyrants and their accomplices tremble. I will perhaps reveal redoubtable secrets that a pusillanimous prudence would have pushed me to hide.

	I will tell what the salvation of my fatherland and the triumph of freedom depend upon. If the same perfidious ones who guide the rage of the assassins aren’t yet visible to all eyes, I will leave to time the task of lifting the veil that covers them, and I will restrict myself to recalling those truths that alone can save this Republic.

	Yes, no matter what lack of seriousness with its lack of foresight might think, whatever perfidious counter-revolutionaries might say! The destiny of the republic is not yet fixed, and the vigilance of the people’s representatives is more than ever necessary.

	It is not the pomp of denominations, not victory, nor riches nor fleeting enthusiasm that constitute the republic; it is the wisdom of laws and especially the goodness of mores; it is the purity and the stability of the maxims of government.

	The laws are to be made, the maxims of government to be assured, and the mores to be regenerated. If one of these things is missing there is in a state naught but errors, pride, passions, factions, ambitions and cupidity. Far from repressing vices the republic would then only allow them freer expansion, and vice necessarily returns us to tyranny.

	Whoever is not master of himself is made to be the slave of others. This a truth that applies to peoples as well as individuals. Do you want to know who are the ambitious?

	Examine who they are who protect the rogues who encourage counter-revolutionaries, who execute attacks, who hold virtue in contempt, who corrupt public morals: it was the march of the conspirators who fell under the mailed fist of the law.

	To make war on crime is the path to the tomb and to immortality; to favor crime is the path to the throne and the scaffold.

	Perverse beings managed to throw the Republic and human reason into chaos. It’s a matter now of pulling them from this in order to create the harmony of the moral and political worlds. The French people have two guarantors of the possibility of executing this heroic enterprise: the current principles of representation and its own virtues.

	The moment in which we find ourselves is favorable, but it is perhaps unique. In the state of equilibrium in which things are it is easy to consolidate liberty, and it is easy to lose it. If France were to be governed for a few months by a corrupted legislature, freedom would be lost. Victory would fall to the factions and immorality.

	Your concert and you energy have astonished and defeated Europe. If you come to know this as well as your enemies you will easily triumph. I spoke of the virtue of the people. Attested to by the entire revolution, this virtue would not alone suffice to reassure us against the factions who attempt without cease to corrupt and tear apart the republic.

	What is the reason for this? It’s that there are two peoples in France.

	The one is the mass of citizens, pure, simple thirsting for justice and friends of liberty. It is this virtuous people that spills all its blood to found the republic that is imposing to internal enemies and shakes the thrones of tyrants.

	The other is a mass of the ambitious and intriguers, it’s the chatting, charlatan, artificial people who show themselves everywhere, who persecute patriotism, who grab onto the tribunes and often the public functions; who abuse the learning that the advantages of the ancien regime gave them in order to fool public opinion. It’s this people of rogues, of foreigners, of hypocritical counter-revolutionaries who place themselves between the people and their representatives in order to fool the one and slander the other; to block their operations, to turn against the public good the most useful laws and the most salutary truths.

	As long as this impure race exists the Republic will be unhappy and precarious. It’s up to you to deliver it by an imposing energy and an unalterable concert.

	Those who seek to divide us, those who stop the march of the government, those who slander it every day among you by perfidious insinuations, those who seek to form against it a dangerous coalition of all the evil passions, of irascible pride, of all the interests opposed to the public interest are your enemies and those of the fatherland. They are foreign agents.

	They are the successors of Brissot, of Hebert, of Danton. If they were to reign one day the Fatherland would be lost.

	In saying these things I sharpen daggers against myself, and it is precisely for this that I say them.

	You will persevere in your principles and in your triumphal march. You will put down crime and you will save the fatherland...

	I have lived long enough... I saw the French people rise up from degradation and servitude to the heights of Glory and Freedom. I saw the chains broken and the guilty thrones that weigh upon the earth near to being overthrown by triumphant hands.

	I saw a yet more astonishing marvel, a marvel that monarchical corruption and the experience of the first period of our Revolution barely allowed to be seen as possible: an assembly invested with the strength of the French nation, marching with a rapid and firm step towards public happiness, devoted to the cause of the people and to the triumph of equality, worthy of giving to the world the signal of Liberty and the example of all the virtues.

	Accomplish, Citizens, accomplish your sublime destiny. You have placed us in the vanguard to bear up under the first efforts of the enemies of Liberty; we will be worthy of this honor, and with our blood we will trace the route of immortality.

	May you constantly deploy that unquenchable energy which you need to put down the monsters of the universe that conspire against you, and to then enjoy in peace the benedictions of the people and of the fruits of your virtues.



------


how was Robespierre shot?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pXxoyk5wOo&t=1h25m0s	
	Robespierre and his associates are taken to City Hall, where they remain under watch for the night.

	Shots ring out in the early morning. Guards race to the second floor. They fling the doors open to a grisly scene. One of Robespierre's allies has thrown himself from the window. Another has taken a pistol to his head. And Robespierre is found semi-conscious with a bullet-wound to the face, has jaw shattered from an apparent suicide attempt.

	Robespierre spends his last hours on the table of the Committee of Public Safety, the very room where he had piloted the terror to its hideously bloody peak. As he is ridiculed and insulted by his former colleagues, Robespierre is unable to respond. The grand master of oratory has been silenced.


https://books.google.com/books?id=kYLu7-cPJTYC&pg=PA218
	None of Robespierre's allies was able to make the Convention listen, and it proceeded to order the arrest of Hanriot, Dumas and other Robespierrist officials, then five deputies: the two Robespierres, St-Just, Couthon and Lebas. The deputies were taken before the Committee of General Security, then sent to different prisons. Maximilien was taken to the Luxembourg Prison, where the startled officers refused to process him, then to the mayor's office where again he was greeted by senior police administrators. No one wanted to arrest the deputies or officials. Who would want to take responsibility for interning 'the Incorruptible'? Finally the deputies found their way to the Town Hall. Hanriot, the mayer Lescot-Fleuriot and Payan summoned a special meeting of the Commune, mobilized the National Guard and closed the city gates.

	Lescot-Fleuriot called on the people of Paris to save those 'who have made the Republic's armies triumph' against the new conspirators in the National Convention. But most of the forty-eight sections made no move: only thirteen finally sent batallions to defend the Town Hall against the Convention. Even so, they had considerable force at their disposal, but were immobilized by uncertainty as to whether to march on the Convention. The Convention had declared itself in permanent session and, after a brief adjournment, resumed again at seven in the evening. News arrived that Robespierre and his allies had called on armed support from the sections. The Convention declared the five deputies outlaws. It gathered sufficient armed forces and, headed by Leonard Bourdon, they entered the Town Hall at about half past two in the morning. By then the sections had melted away from the Place de Greve, in front of the Town Hall, and the armed forces were able to make the arrests, including of Augustin, who broke both legs after leaping from a window in an attempt to escape.

	When the Convention's forces entered, Robespierre was signing a desparate appeal to his own neighbourhood section:

		Commune of Paris, Executive Committee.
		9th Thermidor.

		Courage, partiots of the Section de Piques! Liberty is triumphant! Already those whose firmness is feared by the traitors are at liberty. Everywhere the People is showing itself worthy of its character. The rendezvous is at the Town Hall, where the brave Hanriot will carry out the orders of the Executive Committee that has been formed to save the country.

		Louvet, Payan, Lerebous, Legrand, Ro-

	He would not know that his section, a model of careful deliberation and surveillance, had already rebuffed the Commune's request: 'as long as no order has been received from the National Convention, no order will be given to provide armed force.' By the next day it was describing him as a 'scoundrel'.

	Robespierre's unfinished signature may have been the result of uncertainty about declaring the Commune to be in a state of insurrection against the National Convention. For was not the Convention the French people itself? The incomplete signature is surrounded by spatters of blood. Lebas had two pistols: some have suggested that he blew his brains out with one and that Robespierre tried to commit suicide with the other. Others prefer to believe that he was shot by a gendarme as he was signing the document: he would never have despaired enough to commit suicide when there was still so much to do.

	It was a drawn-out and exruciating agony. The bullet had smashed Robespierre's jaw at 2.30 a.m. At 3.30 he was placed in the waiting room of the Committee of Public Safety, where the curious were able to observe his pain. Two health officers were sent by the Committee of General Security to the Tuileries at 5 a.m., where they found him lying on a table, 'covered with blood'. They inspected the wound to his left cheek, which had smashed his teeth and jaw, and applied bandages to soak up the blood in his mouth, during which 'the monster did not take his eyes off us, but without uttering a word.' ...The curious had already started congregating: 'several of them who were closest lift his right arm to see his face; one says, "He's not dead, because he's still warm, another says, "Isn't he a fine-looking king?" Another says, "even if it were Ceasar's body, why wasn't it thrown on the garbage dump?"

	Robespierre and the others were transferred to the Conciergerie at 11.00 a.m. and condemned to death. He was unable to do anything other than moan, and repeated gestures he made for a pen and paper were refused.


http://alphahistory.com/frenchrevolution/account-arrest-of-robespierre-1794/
	This excerpt from a pamphlet published in Paris in August 1794 recounts the arrest of Robespierre and the nature of his injuries:

	“They went into the Hotel de Ville and found Robespierre in a room near the session chamber. He was lying on the ground, a pistol shot through his jaw. They picked him up, and some of the sans culottes carried him by his feet and his head; there were at least a dozen round him. They tore off his right sleeve and the back of his blue coat. Meanwhile a gendarme found Couthon and fired a pistol into his body. They searched for the rest of the conspirators.

    Robespierre was taken to the Committee of Public Safety, still carried by the same men in the same way. He hid his face with his right arm. The procession paused briefly at the foot of the main stairs. Inquisitive people joined the crowd; several of the nearest lifted his arm to look at his face. One said, ‘He isn’t dead, he’s still warm.’ Another said, ‘Isn’t that a fine king?’ Another: ‘And suppose it was Caesar’s body? Why hasn’t it been thrown on the rubbish dump?’

    The men carrying Robespierre did not want him touched and the ones at his feet told the others at his head to keep it well up, so as to save what little life he had left. They carried their load up at last to the main committee chamber and put it down on a large table opposite a window. They laid his head on a box full of mouldy ration bread. He did not move but he was breathing heavily, and put his right hand on his forehead. Clearly he was trying to hide his face (disfigured as he was, he still showed signs of vanity). Sometimes his forehead contracted and he frowned. Although Robespierre seemed half-conscious, his wounds were clearly causing him great pain.

    Among those who brought him in there were a gunner and a fireman, who never stopped talking to him. They made jokes constantly. One would say, ‘Sire, your majesty is in pain,’ and the other, ‘Well, I think you have lost your tongue, you haven’t finished your proposal, and it began so well. Ah, the truth is, you utterly deceived me, you scoundrel.’ Another citizen said, I only know of one man who understood the art of tyranny, and that is Robespierre.’

    Soon afterwards Elie Lacoste of the Committee of General Security arrived. They showed him the prisoners and he said ‘They must be taken to the Conciergerie, they are outlaws.’ They were removed. Next, he spoke to a surgeon and told him to ‘dress Robespierre’s wounds and make him fit for punishment’. The surgeon said that the lower jaw was broken. He put several wads of linen into his mouth to soak up the blood which filled it. Several times he passed a probe through the hole the ball had made, bringing it out through the mouth; then he washed his face and put a piece of lint on the wound. On this he placed a bandage which went round his chin; then he bandaged the upper part of his head.

    During this operation, everyone offered his comments. When they put the bandage round his head, a man said, ‘Now they are crowning his majesty’. He must have heard all this, for he still had some strength and often opened his eyes. When the wound was dressed they laid him down again, taking care to put the box under his head as a pillow until, they said, ‘it was time for him to put his head through the little window’ [of the guillotine].”


https://books.google.com/books?id=mUoOAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA447&lpg=PA447
	It appears too that Leonard Bourdon was not of a very heroic temporment, and that he had taken it into his head that the Hotel-de-Ville, and all the ground in front of it, was undermined--that the desparate outlaws would setfire to the train, and blow him and his columns, and themselves, and a whole quarter of paris, into the air. While he lingered on the quay, between the Place de Greve and the river, some of his people, without arms, stole among the canoneers, to represent the danger they were in, and the great glory they would obtain if they would only change sides, as their comrades at the Tuileries had done; and this reasoning, and the general aspect of affairs; operated so powerfully upon the minds of these artillery-men--who had only just sworn to Henriot that they would die ffor him, and the commune, and Robespierre,--that firsst they swould they would not fire upon Leonard Bourdon's columns, and next they wheeled around their guns and pointed them against the Hotel-de-Ville.

	At this decisive movement Henriot, who had been consulting within, and assuring the outlaws that their triumph was secure, that the canoneers were steady, and the section batallions coming, ran out into the Place to declaim and harangue, to implore, threaten, and cajole; but it was all in vain--he could not make them turn their guns again--he was threatened with some of their bitter grape--he rushed back, ran upstairs to the great council-champer of the commune, and announced that all was lost. "Villain! and thy cowardice is the cause!" roared Coffinhall, a strong man made stronger by despair, who as he uttered the words, seized light Henriot round the waist, and in the next instant hurled him out of an open window. The ex-commandant general fell upon a dung-heap, or, as others say, into an open sewer. The younger Robespierre, mounting one or two stories higher, threw himself head foremost out of a window: Lebas shot himself effectually with a pistol, and fell dead; Saint-Just clasped a knife or dagger in his hand, but made no further use of it; Couthon crept under a table, and, with a weak hand and blunt weapon, inflicted one or two insignificant wounds on himself; Robespierre put a pistol into his mouth to blow out his brains, but in pulling the trigger he changed the direction of the piece, and the ball broke his under jaw and went through his cheek, without touching any vital part.

	When Leonard Bourdon burst into the room, followed by some gendarmes (himself, according to some accounts, including his own, being disguised as a common gendarme), Robespierre was sitting bleeding on a chair, with a knife in his hand; Couthon was lying under the table as though he were dead; the municipal officers were throwing off their scarfs, and apparently preparing for flight. One or two pistols were fired by the gendarmes, and then all the conspirators quietyl submitted to be take and bound. Henriot, badly wounded, disfigured, and covered with filth, was discovered in the foul place where he had fallen; Augustin Robesierre was also found alive, though with limbs broken and a skull fractured. Some of the armed people, who were now crowding into the council-chamber and running over every part of the vast building, dragged out Couthon by the heels from under the table, and proposed throwing his carcase into the seine; but hereupon he opened his eyes and gave them to understand that he was not yet dead, nor so much as dying. The wounded were put upon brancards, or stretchers, and, shouting "Victory! Victory!" " Leonard Bourdon conducted them to the Tuileries.

	...He led by the hand a modest young man, a common gendarme, and he requested the president and the House to permit this young soldier to ascend the tribune with him. This permission being granted, Leonard related the circumstances which had occured in the PLace de Greve and in the Hotel-de-Ville, adding that he and hte country were under great obligations to the young gendarme now standing at his side, Charles Andre Meda, who had, with his own hand, killed two conspirators, snatched a kinfe from Robespierr, and struck Couthon, who had also armed himself with a knife. He demanded that the president should give fraternal accolade to this brave gendarme.

	...The Convention had scarefuly finished honouring Meda ere Legendre entered the House and related how he had scattered the Jacobins--the majority of whom, according to all appearance,s had dispersed of their own accord as soon as they learned the catastrophe at the Hotel-de-Ville, and before the butcher could have had time to show his face or his double-barrelled pistol among them. Everybody, however, on this night and morning, as on every other night or day when anything important had been done, was eager to show that he had been an important actor, and therefore Legendre related that he had burst into the Jacobin-hall with only ten self-devoting patriots, and with a double-barrelled pistol in his hand wherewith to shoot the conspirator he should find sitting as president. "As bad luck would have it," said he, "the villain mingled with the crowd, and I held my hand for fear of shooting the innocent. That president's name is Vivier. I said to the women in the galleries of the club. 'Citizenessess, you have been led astray; go ye home! The National Convention punishes guilt, but not error.' Men and women went away. I closed and locked the doors of the Jacobins, and here are the keys! As it is the mass of the Convention that has saved the country, tomorow the Convention, en mass, will be Jacobin, and virtue will re-open the doors of that society!" After Legendre had been honoured with enthusiastic applause, Thirion demanded an act of rigour agaisnt the scoundrel Viviet, that man devoted to Robespierre, that traitor who had presided over the club in order to support a rebellion; and the Convention forthwith put VIvier hors la loi. It was now six o'clock in the morning, and the wearied members rose for a few hours.

	In the meanwhile, by orders of the committeemen, Robespierre had been carried into the committee-room of the Salut Public and laid upon a table. ...Some of the citizens who surrounded him, and who were curiously watching all his motions and sufferings, gave him some pieces of white paper: other citizens mocked, insulted and cursed him; and a canoneer, his own townsman, distinguished himself by the fervour and coraseness with which he swore at him or over him. The whole scene was but an epitome of the national character, and a proof that those who triphmed wre as ferocious as those who fell.

	...The only words he spoke were to ask for some water to drink, and for some linen rags, neither of which were given to him;


https://books.google.com/books?id=hFdaAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA214&lpg=PA214
	Municipal Cannoneers, in sudden whirl, anxiously unanimous, range themselve son the Convention side, with shouting. At which shout, Henriot descends from his upper room, far gone in drink as some say; finds his Place de Greve empty; the cannons' mouth turned *towards* him; 1

	...1 [At 2 A.M. the police officers in the Mairie were arrested, and shortly afterwards the decree outlawing the Robespierrists was read to Hanriot's troops. Meanwhile Barras' troops had advanced to the Greve in two lies (by the Quais and by the Rue Saint-Honore), had fraternised with and overpersuaded Hanriot's men, already half-hearted. At 2.30 P.M., there being still about 40 members of the Commune sitting, the cannons were pointed at the Hotel-de-Ville: then the Communards either tried to kill themselves, or awaited their arrest passively (d'Hericault, p. 491 sqq.).]

	...and on the whole,--that is now the catastrophe!

	Stumbling in again, the wretched runk-sobered Henriot announces: "All is lost!" "Miserable, it is thou that hast lost it!" cry they; and fling him, or else he flings himself, out of window: far enough down; into the masonwork and horror of cesspool; not into death but worse. Augustin Robespierre follows him; with the like fate. Saint-Just, they say, called on Lebas to kill him; who would not. Couthon crept under a table; attempting to kill himself; not doing it.--On entering that Sanhedrim of Insurrection, we find all as good as extinct; undone, ready for seizure. Robespierre was sitting on a chair, with pistol-shot blown through not his head but his under-jaw; the suicidal hand had failed.2

	...2 Meda, P. 384. (Meda asserts that it was he who, with infite courage, though in a lefthanded manner, shot Robespierre. Meda got promoted for his services of this night; and died General and Baron. Few credited Meda, in what was otherwise incredible.)

	...With prompt zeal, not without trouble, we gather these wrecked Conspirators; fish up even Henriot and Augustin, bleeding and foul; pack them all, rudely enough, into carts; and shall, before sunrise, have them safe under lock and key. Amid shoutings and embracings.

	Robespierre lay in an anteroom of the Convention Hall, while his Prison-escort was getting ready; the mangled jaw bound up rudely with bloody linin: a spectacle to men. ...Men bully him, insult him: his eyes still indicate intelligence; he speaks no word. ...He spake no word more in this world.

	...his eyes again opened; caught the bloody axe. Samson wrenched the foat off him

	...Samson's work done, there bursts forth shout on shout of applause. shout, which prolongs itself not only over Paris, but over France, but over Europe, and down to this generation.


https://books.google.com/books?id=VGDFBgAAQBAJ&pg=PA339&
	Perhaps if Robespierre and his allies had acted decisively to direct the insurrection, events might have unfolded differently. The deputy Jean Dyzez was convinced that if they had indeed done so, 'we would all have been lost." But the renegade deputies remained strangely hesitant and undecided. Robespierre had always been concerned not to appear as a dictator, and in the end he did nothing either to encourage the Commune or to rally the guardsmen who had gathered outside to support him. he simply allowed events to take their course. By one of two o'clock in the morning, the men outside, without any clear leadership from Robespierre and with the Convention ordering them to desist, began shoulding their muskets, leading away their cannons, and returning to their neighborhoods. Soon thereafter, two groups of guardsmen loyal to the Convention, led by Leonard Bourdon and Paul Barras--a former military noble--broke into the now-undefended city hall. In the melee that ensued, Robespierre's younger brother leaped out of a window and was badly insured, while Couthon was pushed down the stairway in his wheelchair and was also hurt. Robespierre and Lebas were shot. Whether or not the two had fired on themselves is still debated, but the result was that Lebas lay dead and that Maximilien's jaw and teeth were shattered and he writed in pain on the floor.


https://books.google.com/books?id=aqI_YmyaJQgC&pg=PA145
	The conspirators, at the head of the General Council of the Communie, are at bay: Robespierre, his younger brother Saint-Just, Lebas, Couthon, Hanriot, in the course of the night all see themselves surrounded in the Miason Communie, where they have taken refuge from the Parisian troops who have remained loyal to the Convention. When the place is attack, in the heart of the night, they are lost. Some try to flee, such as Hanriot or Couthon; others commit suicide, like Lebas, the younger Robespierre--whose attempt fails when he leaps out the window--ahd, perhaps, Maximilien Robespierre. Does the bullet that shatters his jaw comes from his own pistol or from that of the policeman Charles-Andre Merda? Or are there even two bullets? Scholars have been quarelling over this point for centuries. 


https://books.google.com/books?id=L40DAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA233
	They forced the town-hall. Robespierre fired a pistol at himself, which only wounded his jaw. St. Just entreated Lebas to kill him. "Coward! imitate me," said he to St. Just, and put a pistol to his own head, which ended his days. Couthon, hid under the table, wavered with a kinfe in his hand, with which he could not resolve to stab himself. Robespierre's brother threw himself from a casement, but only received bruises. Coffinhall threw Henriot out of window; he was found in a state of great laceration. All the Corporation were seized with the rest, and carried to the Committee.



https://archive.org/stream/lifeofmaximilien00lewerich/lifeofmaximilien00lewerich_djvu.txt
	About this time the troops of the Convention headed 
	by Leonard Bourdon were silently marching along the 
	Quays, and halted as they turned into the Place de 
	Greve, where the shouts of " Vive la ConvoitioiiP' saluted 
	them. Henriot, sword in hand, galloped like a madman 
	into the middle of the crowd, and shouted " Vive la Com- 
	muner but the contempt felt for him, his drunken, disor- 
	dered appearance, the blocked up streets, the expected 
	arrival of fresh troops, all combined to discourage the 
	Sectionists. The cannoniers overwhelmed their general 
	with hisses and yells, and then turning the mouths of 
	their cannon against the Hotel de Ville, they cried " Vive 
	la Convention P' and quickly dispersed. 

	A profound silence reigned at the Hotel de Ville, and 
	all at once the report of fire arms was heard within, and 
	cries of horror followed. Dulac, a resolute agent of the 
	Committee of General Safety, at the head of five and 
	twenty sappers, and a party of grenadiers, crossed the 
	square, and beating down the doors with hatchets, as- 
	cended the grand staircase. 

	Mute and motionless, around a table in the Salle 
	d'Egalite, Robespierre and his companions listen to the 
	sounds without; their eyes fixed on the door awaiting 
	their fate. Robespierre is dressed in the sky blue coat, 
	and nankeen trousers, which he had had made for the 
	Festival of the Supreme Being. Lcbas, armed with a 
	brace of pistols, presents one to Robespierre, conjuring 
	him to put an end to his existence; but Robespierre, 
	although he always carried poison about him, refuses to 
	commit suicide. Saint Just, and Couthon, side with him. 
	And now the jinghng noise of arms becomes frightfully 
	distinct. Lebas places a pistol to his heart, and in another 
	instant falls dead into the arms of Robespierre the 
	younger, who leaps out of window into the court, breaking 
	a leg in the fall. Coffinhal makes the chambers and 
	lobbies resound with his imprecations and hurried foot- 
	steps. He meets with Henriot, in a stupor of terror and 
	wine, reproaches him for his cowardly conduct, then 
	seizing him in his arms, hurls him out of the window on 
	a dungheap, exclaiming, " Away, wretched drunkard, 
	you are not w^orthy of a scaiFold !" 

	Meanwhile Leonard Bourdon draws up his men in 
	order of battle before the steps leading to the Hotel de 
	Ville; ascends them himself, accompanied by five gens 
	d'armes, and a detachment of soldiers. Dulac joins them ; 
	the whole party rushes eagerly towards the Salle de I'Ega- 
	lite, where, with the butt-ends of their muskets, they 
	drive in the door, amidst cries of " Down with the ty- 
	rant ! " The poor tyrant, pale, and anxious, is sitting silent 
	at the table. Leonard Bourdon dares not meet his look. 
	With his right hand he seizes Meda's arm, and points 
	with his left at Robespierre, exclaiming, " That 's the 
	man ! " Meda levels his pistol, fires, and the head of the 
	unhappy Robespierre drops on the table, staining with 
	blood the proclamation, before mentioned.* The ball has 
	entered the left side of his face, and carried away several 
	of his teeth. Couthon endeavours to rise upon his withered 


	* This curious paper is extant, and in the possession of M. Saint 
	Albin. The letters Hob — , of Robespierre's unfinished signature, are 
	stili legible on the blood-stained paper. 


	...limbs, but staggers under the table. Saint Just, the 
	inexorable_, imperturbable, and not unheroic fanatic, sits 
	motionless at the table, now gazing mournfully at Robes- 
	pierre, now with proud looks of defiance eyeing his ene- 
	mies. In a few minutes all the prisoners are marched off in 
	triumph to the Convention. The gray dawn gently steal- 
	ing over the sky discovers Robespierre carried on a litter 
	by four gens d'armes, his face covered with a handkerchief 
	steeped in blood. At five o'clock, a column of soldiers 
	enters the Tuileries, where the Convention is awaiting the 
	termination of the affair. A loud murmur proclaims the 
	approach of Barras and Freron. Charlier is acting as 
	President. *' The coward Robespierre is there," he cries, 
	pointing to the door. '^ Shall he come in?" " No! 
	no I " exclaimed the members, some from horror, others for 
	pity. " To bring before the Convention the body of so 
	great a criminal would be to rob this day of its glory. 
	The corpse of a tyrant can only bring contagion with it. 
	The only spot for Robespierre and his accomplices is the 
	Place de la Revolution." 

	Meanwhile, Robespierre is laid upon a table in the 
	adjoining ante-room. His head supported by the back of 
	a chair ; his sky-blue coat, and nankeen trousers, are 
	stained with blood ; his stockings are fallen down over his 
	ankles. Crowds flock in, clamber on stools and benches, 
	and look with strange curiosity and malicious triumph at 
	this idol and ruler of the Republic now fallen so low ! 
	They shower on him expressions of contempt, invective, 
	and abuse. The officers of the Convention point him out 
	to the spectators, as a tiger is pointed out in a menagerie. 
	He closes his eyes and feigns death, to escape the insults 
	and curses heaped upon him. " Search him," exclaims 
	the crowd. He is searched. A brace of pistols, in a 
	case, witli the arms of France engraved upon them, is 
	found in his pocket. "What a villain!'^ cry the by- 
	standers. *' Here is proof of his aspiring to the throne. 
	He uses the symbols of royalty."* There was also found 
	upon him a pocket-book, containing bank-notes and bills 
	to the amount of £400. There is no reason to suppose 
	this money belonged to him. It was in all probability 
	pubhc money, and about to be applied to public use. 
	All attempts to throw even a suspicion of pecuniary cor- 
	ruptibiHty upon him have signally failed. There were 
	only a few francs found in his lodgings after his death. 

	His colleagues enter and insult him ; some even spit in 
	his face ; while the clerks of the Bureau prick him with 
	their penknives.f Legendre, entering the Salle, approaches 
	the body, and in theatrical gesture apostrophises it: — *' So 
	then, tyrant 1 you, for whom only yesterday the Republic 
	was not vast enough, occupy to-day about two feet wide 
	of a little table ! " What must have been Robespierre's 

	* These pistols, shut up in their case, still loaded, proved that Robe- 
	spierre did not shoot himself. Some accounts, and even the surgeon's 
	testimony, are cited to prove that he must have shot himself ; but, 
	although the evidence, with the exception of that cited above, is pretty 
	equally balanced, yet that must be held as decisive. Besides, did he 
	not refuse to commit suicide ? 

	t This is very ignoble, very horrible, and yet very natural. Does not 
	Homer make his beloved Greeks thus insult the corpse of Hector, 
	each wounding it with his spear :— 

	...Down clanked the axe, and the head of 
	Robespierre rolled into the basket. The crowd held their 
	breath for some seconds, and then, as if an enormous load 
	Avere rolled from their breasts, burst into a loud and 
	unanimous cheer. The spectators shed tears of joy, and 
	embraced each other in transport, crowding around the 
	scaffold to behold the bloody remains of the tyrants. 
	One man approaching said, " Yes, Robespierre, there is a 
	God !" 

	And thus this strange mystery of a man passed away 
	into eternity ! 


https://books.google.com/books?id=3KA6AQAAIAAJ&pg=PA222&lpg=PA222
	Had Robespierre possessed common courage, he would probably even now have been victorious; but he was wholly unmanned; he wept like an infant, and whined most lamentably about the ingratitude of men. In the mean time, the leaders of the opposite party acted with promptness and decision. Legendre, singly, entered the hall of the jacobins, and by his rude but vigorous eloquence, actually disperesed the, put out the lights, locked the doors, and carried the keys to the convention. Barras and Leonard Bourdon collected some battalions of national guards, and their columsn met at the house of the commune. They ascended the staircase amid shouts of vive la convention, and the reign of Rebespierre was at an end. As another proof of he uncertainty of history, and even of evidence, we may refer to the different ways of narrating one of the most important particular in the fall of this execrable being. His jaw-bone was broken by a pistol-shot:--Who fired it? General report affirmed that it was himself. Mr. Lavallee was told by well-informed men, that it was a gen-d'arme. The Dictionare des Hommes Marquans hints that his brother pulled the trigger. On turning to the Dictionaire Historique, we find the name of the gen d'arme Charles Meda to whom the honour of shooting him is assigned; and to crown this assemblage of contradictions, Bealiue, in his very interesting Essais Historiques, affirms that it was Robespierre himself who fired the pistol, and produces in a note the testimony of the keeper of the hotel de ville, who was of course on the spot, and declares that he had witnessed the act.


http://www.academia.edu/download/46762645/Robespierres_Last_Letter-_A_Final__Failed_Attempt_to_Rally_the_French_People_to_the_Terrors_Cause.docx
	After holing up in Paris’s Hôtel de Ville, Robespierre and his compatriots sent out letters to the forty-eight section of the city, seeking to incite the people of France to rise up in their defense (Scurr, 354). One such letter, now housed in the Carnavalet Museum in Paris, is a direct appeal to the citizens of Robespierre’s own Section des Piques. This document, baring the signatures of four of the Committee’s members (Lerebours, Legrand, Louvet, and Payan) is a simple one, which reads as follows:
		Courage, patriots of the Pike Section, liberty triumphs! Already those whose steadfastness rendered them formidable to traitors are at liberty; everywhere the people are showing themselves worthy of their reputation. The meeting place is at the commune where the brave Hanriot will carry out the orders of the Executive Committee which has been established to save the country (Robespierre et al.)

	Robespierre’s signature was meant to accompany the others, however, it is incomplete. In its place are several splatters of what appears to be blood. They were spilled onto the document, according to legend, from a gunshot wound to Robespierre’s face.

	What, or who, caused the wound has long been a subject of historical debate. Jean Matrat, writing in 1975, denies that the stains are blood, stating that “chemical analysis of the stains has shown them to be ink” (Matrat, 280). However, Matrat offers no source for the results of such a chemical analysis, so one must question such a claim. Ruth Scurr, more cautious in her analysis, offers the opinion that the blood could be that of Robespierre, or that the stain could have been on the document before his arrest, and vomiting caused by an illness, not a gunshot wound, is what caused Robespierre to pause, leaving his signature incomplete (Scurr, 354-355). Paris’s Musée Carnavalet, where the document is housed, states on its website that the blood is that of Robespierre, from a wound caused by a bullet to the jaw ("France: Facsimile of the Call to the People").

	The causes of the stains, and their origins, have been the basis of significant historical conjecture. What has not, however, is the context of the letter. While the letter is one of several similar letters that were sent out in the hours before the arrest of Robespierre and his comrades, this particular letter holds historical significance for several reasons. For example, the letter was addressed to the patriots of Robespierre’s own Section des Piques, a fact that, Thompson notes, is ironic, because Robespierre’s own section of Paris could not be counted on to defend him (Thompson 577). The letter also holds significance because, despite the dubious nature of the stains, there is no doubt that this was the last document that Robespierre had a hand in composing before his execution the next day. 

	...The forces of the National Assembly, guessing at an over simplistic password (Vive Robespierre!) were able to gain entry to the Hôtel de Ville, and, as popular history tells us, captured Robespierre just as he was signing the letter to rally the Section des Piques of Paris. In the melee, Robespierre was wounded, accounting, as some would say, for the stains on the parchment that would serve as his last written dialogue (Thompson, 577). He was arrested, held in the same cell as Mary Antoinette had been before her demise (Andress, 343), and executed without trial on 28 July, 1794. Despite his amazing oratory skills, the letters similar to the one he was signing upon his arrest were simply not enough to rally the poor of Paris back to his, and his allies, side. 

	This letter was written in a time that Robespierre knew he faced imminent death. Without the excesses of both his own rule and those around him, the Revolution in France does not enter its most radical, bloody, phase and the letter is not composed when it is composed. Despite the power that Robespierre held over France (as head of the Jacobins, the de facto leader of the Committee of Public Safety, the President of the National Assembly, and even the secular head of the Cult of the Supreme Being), in the end, his influence could not save him from falling victim to the very Terror that he helped cause. The letters were intended to call upon the people of Paris to rise up and save their wayward saviors, yet, in the end, Paris did not organize, the soldiers of the Commune, disheartened and confused, left, and Robespierre and his cronies were left to defend themselves.

	While historians are left to debate the implications of both the letter itself and the stains on the document, there can be no doubt as to what the letter demonstrates: Robespierre, stripped of all power as a wanted man, was not able to use the gifts he had harnessed to rise to power to save himself. His pleas, in effect, fell on deaf ears, and he was force to face a tide of a revolution that, although set aflame by his own fanning, he was unable to turn back. While my interpretation of the physical circumstances of the letter (Robespierre was signing the letter and was shot in the jaw just before his arrest, accounting for both his incomplete signature and the stains on the parchment) may differ with the views of historians such as Ruth Scurr, Jean Matrat, and J. M. Thompson, one thing can be said without objection: the letter, and what it signified for its intended audience, did not play out as Robespierre intended. Despite the cries for liberty within, the document only signifies the failures of Robespierre and the Committee of Public Safety.


Thompson




https://books.google.com/books/about/Robespierre_and_the_French_Revolution_by.html?id=m83jSAAACAAJ

Kindle Location 3723

	During the night, the friends of the prisoners made a last effort to arouse the Sections. The tocsin was rung and artillery was dischared at regular intervals. Henriot, commander of the National Guards, mounted a horse and charged through the district of St. Antoine like a madman, calling the citizens to arms; but everything had been so quietly executed by the authorities and in so summary a manner that the people did not understand the meaning of this furious appeal. Henriot, who under the excitement had imbibed somewhat too freely of wine, was arrested, but was soon released from gaol by two hundred National Guards.

	It was midnight of July 27, 1794. The streets around the City Hall were crowded with people ready to be led if Roespierre's friends had been alert, but there was no leader. The Mountain, the Jacobins, the Commune, and the National Guards were still loyal, but there was no real effort made to unite them against the Convention and the committee. In truth, Robespierre had "not organize force ; his partisans, though numerous, were not enlisted and incorporated."

	...So dissolved the last hope of Robespierre. He and his companions had listened to the shouts outside and so long as they continued there seemed to be a chance for rescue, but now all was silent. Suddenly through the corridor leading to the room in which the prisoners were confined, were heard approaching footsteps and the clinking of arms. The accused looked at one another, and each face revealed the same thought without the utterance of a word. "Kill me," said St. Just to Lebas. "I have something else to do," was the reply, and Lebas shot himself dead. Couthon tried to open his veins. Coffin Hal and the younger Robespierre leaped from the windows, the latter breaking his leg in the fall to the ground.
	
	It will, perhaps, always be a mooted question as to whether or not Robespierre shot himself; but the commonly accepted account is that Bourdon, leading a squad of soldiers, entered the room, pointed at RObespierre and sad "That is the man," whereupon a gendarme named Meda raised his gun, took deliberate aim, and fired. The wound inflicted was not fatal, but the lower jaw was broken and blood spurted over a paper lying on the table upon which Robespierre had just written the first two letters of his name, "Ro." It was the call his friends had persuaded y him to sign and bore the names of Payan, Legrand, Louvet, and Lerebnours. "Brothers and friends, the country is in imminent danger," the; proclomation read. "The wicked have mastered the Convention where they hold in chains the virtuous Robespierre. To arms! To arms! Let us not lose the fruits of the 18th of August and the 2nd of June. Death to the traitors!" Had this spirited appeal been published, it might have had a hearty response and have saved the day; but, at this crucial point in his career, the nerve of Robespierre as usual failed him, and he hesitated to act at a time when promptitude was the essence of success. The influence of that very system of terror which he had helped to inaugurate and maintain seemed now, that he had fallen under its spell, to disable him as much as t did any of the victims that had heretofore perished beneath its cruel sway.

	Towards morning Robespierre was carried ona a litter into another room and was laid upon a table, with his head resting at first on the back of a chair and afterwards on a box containing samples of mouldy army bread. A bloody handkerchief bound round his head, held his jaw in place. One cheek, his forehead and his eyes were all that could be seen of his face. He had on a blue coat -- the same that he wore at the Festival of the Supreme Being, nankeen breeches, and white stockings, the latter in the struggle having fallen about his knees.

	The committee sent a surgeon to dress the wounds. St. Just, brave and loyal to the last, stood at the side of his friend, watched over him tenderly, and ministered to his wants. Couthon was weak from less of blood and Augustin Robespierre suffered untold agony with his broken leg. Henriot, half drunk, had taken refuge in a sewer, but, fished out by the guard, was sent to the Town Hall. Coffin Hal escaped after his leap from the window, but was arrested a few days afterwards and sent to the scaffold. Lerebours successfully avoided pursuit and reached Switzerland in safety.

	While Robespierre was lying on the table, his enemies came into the room and twitted him; even the clerks from the adjoining offices flocked around him, mocked him in his agony, and pricked him with the points of their penknives. Legendre, the butcher, insensate as the ox he slaughtered, scoffed at the man whose mere glance, in the past, could have made him cower. "Ha ! Ha !" he cried. "You for whom the Republic was not vast enough are now content with a few feet of table space." "Tais toi, massacruer des boeufs" -- "Silence, butcher of bullocks," was the reply.

	When the blood gathered in his throat, Robespierre wiped his mouth on the sheepskin that formed the flap of a holster for a brace of pistols. By a singular coincidence the case bore the inscription: "The Great Monarch; Lecourt, Maker to the King." An on-looker gave him some sheets of paper to wipe the blood from his lips, and he thanked him saying: "Je vous remercie, Monsieur." Strangely enough, in his last moments he renounced the Jacobin form of speech to which he had been accustomed and which he had assiduously used since its introduction.

	Some one, moved by sympathy, no doubt, placed at his side a cup of vinegar and a sponge, and with these he occasionally moistened his lips which were now swollen and feverish. He kept his eyes closed and not a word escaped him; he suffered with the fortitude of a Stoic.

	Barras states, in his Memoirs, that an attendant surgeon, having picked up some of Robespierre's teeth that had fallen to the floor, placed them on the table, when "a gunner pounced upon them and exclaimed: "You scoundrel, I will keep this as a monument of execration."

	...the carts containing the prisoners started for the scaffold. A more grew some, wretched lot of men was never carried to execution. There were the younger Robespierre, unable to stand or sit upright because of his broken limb; Couthon, a paralytic, his garments covered with the blood that ad oozed from his open veins; Henriot, his face besmeared with gore and his shirt soiled with the mud of the sewer in which he had concealed himself; and the great Robespierre, his head tied up in a bandage to hold his broken jaw in position, his clothing soaked with blood.

	...At a cross street the carts stopped to give the funeral of Madame Aigne the right of way. She had killed herself the day before from fear of Robespierre, so t was rumored.

	...As Robespierre stood waiting to be bound to the plank, Samson, the executioner, rudely snatched the bandage from his face, the jaw fell and the pain was so great that he uttered a piercing cry of anguish. It was the dying shrike of the Revolution.

	...The execution of Rebespierre may be described as the closing scene in the dreadful tragedy of the "Reign of Terror." After the guillotine ceased its work, the multitude dispersed, each citizen on the way to his home wondering the while what would be the next act in the drama.


History Channel (2015?): Robespierre and crew at City Hall, shots heard, guards run up and find one of his allies thrown himself out the window, another shot himself in the head, and Robespierre shot himself in the jaw.

Spends last hours being ridiculed by collegues but can't speak.



Peter McPhee, 2012: Convention orders arrest of Hanriot, Dumas, and, other Robespierrist officials, and five deputies: St Just, Couthon, Lebs, Augustin Robespierre and Robespierre. No one wanted to arrest the deputies or officials, and deputies including Hanriot, Lescot-Fleuriot and Payan made it to town hall and had a meeting.

Mayor Lescot Fleuriot called on people Paris to defend Robespierre and crew against Convention conspirators, most of 48 sections made no move but 13 sent batallions to defend the Town Hall against the Convention.

The convention heard they asked for military help and declared the five deputies outlaws. They gathered forces headed by Leonard Bourdon then entered the town hall at 2:30 AM. By then the 13 sections had melted away, and they were able to arrest them.

Augustin Robespierre had jumped from a window in an attempt to escape. Robespierre left an order to his neighborhoods section with an unfinished signature that was spattered in blood, which might have been because Robespierre was uncertain whether or not to attack the Convention ("For was not the Convention the French people itself?"). Lebas had two pistols and some suggest he blew his brains out and Robespierre tried to commit suicide with the other. Others say he was shot by a gendarme while signing the document.

Robespierre wasn't able to speak and gestures he made for a pen and paper were refused.



1794 Paris Pamphlet: The gendarmes went to Hotel de Ville and found Robespierre in a room near the session chamber lying on the ground with a pistol shot through his jaw. They picked him up then a gendarme found Couthon and fired a pistol into his body, then searched for the rest.

After Robespierre captured, some joke he "lost his tounge" and pamphlet doesn't say anything about Robespierre speaking.



C. Knight, The Pictorial History of Englandl, 1843: Bourdon shows up appears to be worried the Robespierrist outlaws will blow up themselves and a chunk of Paris. Some of his people convinced canoneers in front of Hotel de Ville to switch sides and point their guns at the hotel instead.

They previously said they were loyal to Henriot, and when this happened he ran out and tried to convince them to switch back. When this didn't work he ran back to the meeting in council-chamber of the commune and announced all is lost. Coffinhall roared "Villain! and thy cowardice is the cause!" and grabbed Henriot and threw him out the window into a dung heap or a sewer. Augsitn Robespierre threw himself head first out a window, Lebas shot himself with a pistol, Saint-Just clasped a knife but didn't use it, and Couthon crept under a table and hit himself with a blunt weapon but this was ineffectual. Robespierre put a pistol in his mouth to blow out his brains, but when he pulled the trigger it slipped and it broke his jaw and went through is cheek instead. 

Leonard Bourdon burst into the room disguised as a common gendarme and found Robespierre bleeding on a chair with a knife in his hand, Couthon lying under the table as though dead, and some municipal officers apparently getting ready to run. The Gendarmes fired one or two pistol shots, and then all the conspirators quietly submitted to be arrested. They found Henriot covered in filth where he had fallen, adn Augustin found alive with broken limbs and a fractured skull. Some of the armed people (gendarmes or soliders?) dragged Couthon and thought of throwing his body into a river but found he was still alive.

Bourdon told the convention they owe a lot to Gendarme Charles Andrew Meda, who killed two conspirators, grabbed a knife from Robespierre, and struck Couthon who also had a knife.

Shortly after this Legendre entered and told about how he had scattered the Jacobins. By all appearances, most of them dispersed on their own when the learned of the catastrophe of Hotel de ville. But everone this night was eager to show they had been an important actor, and Legendre said he burst into the Jacobin-hall with only 10 self-devoting patriots with a double-barrelled pistol to shoot the conspirator he should find sitting as president. He said the president's name was Vivier, but Vivier mingled with the crowd. Legndre said he asked the crowd to disperse telling them they were misled. They all clapped for Legendre and demanded action against Vivier.

Meanwhile, Robespierre was carried away and put on a table where citizens could look at him. Some gave him pieces of white paper, others mocked and cursed at him. The only words Robespierre spoke were to ask for water and some linen rags.



Thomas Carlyle, 1902: The Canoneers switch to the Convention side with shouting. Then Heriot comes down, some say drunk, and finds the Cannons pointing at him. Previously, the decree outlying the Robespierrists was read to Henriot's troops, and Barras' troops had fratnerised with them and persuaded them, who were already half-hearted. (then according to Carlyle citing d'Hericault, the Communards either tried to kill themselves or awaited arrest passivley).

Henriot stumbled back in drunk and announced "All is lost!" they cried "Miserable, it is thou that hast lost it!" and threw him, or he threw himself, out the window, where he fell into a cesspool. Augustin then exited the window. Saint-Just, they say, asked Lebas to kill him but he wouldn't'. Couthon crept under a table and tried to kill himself but didn't.

When "we" entered the room, found all undone and ready for seizure: Robespeirre sitting on chair with pistol shot through his jaw. Meda says it was he who shot Robespierre, and he got promoted for his services, but this is incredible. The conspirators were gathered up and Henriot and Augustin were fished up.

Robespierre law in an anteroom of the Convention hall and was a spectacle. He was bullied and insulted but spoke no more word in this world. Samson executed him and the crowd, Paris, France, and Europe applauded ever after down to this generation.



Timothy Tackett, 2015: Robespierre and his allies debated what to do. Jean Dyzez said if they acted decicively "all would be lost." Robespierre didn't want to act like a dictator. In the end he did nothing to encourage the Commune or rally the guardsmen outside. Without clear leadership from Robespierre the men outside shouldered their muskets and left when the Convention ordered them to desist. Then two groups of Convention guardesmen led by Bourdon and Barrass broke into the city hall. In the melee, Augistin jumped out a window, Couthon was pushed down the stairs in his weelchar, and Robespierre and Lebas were shot. It is still debated whether or not Lebas and Robespierre had shot themselves.



Antoine de Baecque, 2013: Robespierre, Augustin, Saint-Just, Lebas, Couthon, Hanriot, all see themselves surrounded in the Maison Communie. When the place is attacked, some try to flee, like Hanriot or Couthon, others commit suicide, like Lebas and Augustin, and maybe Robespierre. Was Robespierre shot from his own pistol, from the policeman Charles Merda, or even from two bullets? Scholars have been quaralleing over this for centuries.



Peter Hervé, 1818: When Convention forces entered, Robespierre shot himself in the jaw, St Just asked Lebas to kill him, Lebas killed himself, Couthon went under a table with a knife and wavered but couldn't resolve to stab himself, Augustin threw himself from a casement but was only bruised, Coffinhall threw Henriot out a window and he was lacerated. They were all arrested and carried to the Committee.



George Henry Lewes, 1849: Bourdon marched up to the Place de Greve to shouts of "Vive la Convoition." Henriot galloped around the middle of the crowd like a madman and shouted "Vive la Commune" but contempt fell on him fro his drunken disorderly appearance. Henriot's appearence, the blocked up streets, and the expected arrival of fresh troops all combined to discourage the sectionists, so they turned their cannons against the Hotel de Ville and then dispersed.

There was silence then report of gunshots followed by cries of horror from the Hotel de Ville. Committee of General Safety agent Dulac at the head of 25 sappers and some grenadiers beat down the doors with hatches and went upstairs.

Robespierre and his friends heard them coming upstairs and Lebas gives him a pistol. Robespierre refuses to commit suicide and Saint Just and Couthon side with him. As they hear troops approaching, Lebas shoots himself in heart and falls into the arms of Augustin, who jumps out the window. Coffinhal stomps around and throws Henriot out a window and yells at him for being drunk.

Meanwhile Bourdon goes upstairs himself with five gendarmes and some soldiers. Dulac joins them and they force down the door. They see Robespierre sitting at a table. Bourbon grabs Meda's arm, points at him and says "that's the man!" and Meda shoots him in the face, who drops on the table and stains with blood the proclamation with his unfinished signature. Couthon tries to get up with bad legs but staggers under the table. Saint Just sits there muornfully and defiantly.

Robespeirre is taken to a room in Place de la Revolution and some citizens see him. They search his pocket and find a brace of loaded pistols with the arms of France engraved on them. They also found 400 pounds on him but Lews stresses "There is no reason to suppose this money belonged to him. It was in all probability pubhc money, and about to be applied to public use." (?) They carried Robespierre away and executed him and everyone cheered.



Washington Irving and/or Lavellee, 1817: Robespierre cried like a baby. Meanwhile, Legendre entered the hall of Jacobins and dispersed the crowd, locked the door, and carried the keys to the convention. Barras and Bourden went upstairs with some soldiers and the reign of Robespierre was over. There are many different accounts of who shot Robespierre--General report said it was himself, Lavallee was told it was a gendarme, the Dictionar ydes Hommes Marquans hints it was Augustin, and the Dictionare Historique says it was Meda. Beliue in his Essais Historiques says Robespierre did it, and includes a note of the testimony of the keeper of the hotel de ville, who was of course on the spot, who said he had witnessed the act.



Martin Smith: Robespiere and his compatriots were sending out letters to the 48 sections of the city at Hotel de Ville asking them to rise up to their defense. On the letter to his own section, Robespeierre's signature was incomplete with splatters of what look like blood in its place. According to legend, these were split by a gunshot wound to his face.

The cause of the stains and their origins are a subject of historical debate. Matrat said chemical analysis shows they were ink but he didn't cite any source. Scurr says maybe the stain was on the paper already and Robespier stopped in the middle of writing his signature to vomit. The Paris meuseum where the doc is held says the blood was Robospieree's from a bullet to his jaw.

The letter was to Robospierre's own section, but his section could not be counted on to defend him.

The National Assembly forces guessed the password "Vive Robespierre!" and entered Hotel de Ville, where, as popular history tells us, they captured Robespiere just as he was signing the letter. Some say Robespierre being wounded in the melee accounts for the stain on the letter.

Despite his amazing oratory skills, Robespiere's letters weren't enough to rally the poor of Paris back to his and his allies side. Paris did not organize and the soldiers of the Commune were disheartened and confused and left.

Smith thinks the stains were from blood from a shot to Robespierre's jaw. Despite calls for liberty, the letter only signifies the failures of Robespierre and the Committee of Public Safety.


(picture of letter: https://www.tripadvisor.com/LocationPhotoDirectLink-g187147-d2038979-i175728261-Paris_Charms_Secrets_Tours-Paris_Ile_de_France.html)


James Matthew Thompson, 1952: During the night, Robespierre's crew made a last effort to arouse the Sections. Henriot rode around but people didn't understand him. He was drunk and got arrested. Then he was released from gaol by 200 National Guards.

The streets around the City Hall were crowded with people ready to be led if Robespierre's friends had been alert, but there was no leader. Many groups, National Guards were still loyal, but there was no real effort made to unite them against the Convention.

Robespierre and his companions listened to the shouts outside then all was silent, then they heard approaching footsteps and clinking of arms. St Just asked Lebas to kill him, Lebas killed himself, Couthon tried to open his veins, and Coffin Hal and Augustin jumped out the windows.

It might always be a mooted question whether or not Robespierre shot himself, but commonly accepted account is that Bourdon pointed him out and Meda shot him, splatting blood on the paper he had was in the middle of signing. The paper said "the country is imminent danger ... to arms! to arms!" If this spirited appeal was published, it might have saved the day, but the nerve of Robespierre failed at this critical point.

Robespierre was carried to another room and laid on a table. The comittee sent a surgeon and St Just watched over him. Couthon was weak from blood loss and Augustin suffered from a broken leg. Henriot had taken refuge in a sewer but was fished out. Coffin Hal escaped after leaping from the window but was arrested a few days later and executed. Lerebours avoided pursuit and reached Switzerland in safety.

A bunch of people and clerks from adjoining offices came in and made fun of Robespiere and poked him. Legendre laughed and said he is greedy and now emperor of a table and Robespier replied "silence butcher of bullocks!"

Robespierre wiped his mouth on holster flap of pistols who case coincidentally bore the inscription "The Great Monarch; Lecourt, Maker to the King." An on-looker gave him some setts of paper to wipe the blood from his lips, and Robespierre replied "Je vous remercie, Monsier." Strangley, in his last moments he renounced the Jacobin for of speech he had been accustomed to and that he had assdiuously used since its introduction.

Someone placed a cup of vinegar and a sponge near him, no doubt moved by sympathy. Robespierre moistened his swollen and feverish lips. Not a word escaped him as he suffered with the fortitude of a Stoic. Barras wrote in his memoirs that some of Robespierre's teeth fell to the floor and he and a gunner fought over them.

Augustine, Couthon (covered in blood), Henriot, and Robespierre were carted to be executed. They stopped at Madame Aigne's funeral, who had killed herself the day before from fear of Robespierre, so it was rumored.

The execution ripped off Robespierre's bandage and he roared in pain because his jaw fell. All were executed, the closing act of the great terror. Now, each citizen wondered what would be the next act in the drama.



------

https://books.google.com/books?id=kYLu7-cPJTYC&dq=Robespierre%3A+A+Revolutionary+Life&q=H%C3%B4tel+de+Ville#v=onepage&q=de%20Ville&f=false