

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baji_Rao_II
	The British triumphed, and the Marathas were forced to accept losses of territories due to internal rivalries between Holkars and Scindias and treachery at all the battles done by Scindia's French and other European officers, who mostly handled the imported guns in Maratha army- the Marathas failing to train their own men in sufficient number to handle imported guns.


what's up with that?

Bezmenov says the "subversion" he was talking about is an old trick

Machiavelli observed these sorts of things going on for a long time and in his time period

Machiavelli lays out the mindset of a tyrant, thinking of people, countries as peices on a chessboard, thinking of what you say and what you do not in terms of what's true or right but the effect on the people who want to control and how it serves your interests



http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Anglo-Maratha_Wars#Second_Anglo-Maratha_War
	At the Battle of Assaye (the fictional venue of Richard Sharpe's triumph[3]) on September 23, 1803—the British led by the future 1st Duke of Wellington in what was his first major military success defeated the Maratha rebels on behalf of Baji Rao, whom they restored to power in terms of the Treaty of Bassein.
	The War

	This act of craven expediency on the part of the Peshwa, their nominal overlord, horrified and disgusted the Maratha chieftains, who wanted least of all to see an extension of British power; in particular, the Sindhia rulers of Gwalior and the Bhonsle rulers of Nagpur and Berar contested the agreement. They were defeated, respectively, at Laswari and Delhi by Lord Lake and at Assaye and Argaon by Sir Arthur Wellesley. The Holkar rulers of Indore belatedly joined the fray and were also defeated by the British.


sort of like what Machiavelli said about a fractured Kingdom being easier to take over

treaty of Bassein made so Peshwa can't make treaties or start wars without consulting East India Company, sort of making it official he's a puppet

so they grabbed off that chunk of India and the treaty was so bad it started a war right away


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baji_Rao_II

last paragraph of Baji Rao's wikipedia article is weird


------


https://www.quora.com/What-was-the-cause-of-the-three-Anglo-Maratha-wars
	The British Successful?

	The expansionist policy of the British was highly successful For the British adopted various policies that suited them from time to time.

	They did not follow war for annexation uniformly. When they found that the native powers could be subdued and a subsidiary alliance could be easily thrust upon them the British refrained from following a path of warfare.

	This policy doubly benefitted the English For to establish domination over such powers there was no need for spending money and wage war.

	Thus either by warfare or by machinations the British, by 1856 established a vast British Empire in India.


says British liked to use "machinations" to spread their empire

but who did them, how, where did they learn them from, who did they teach them to?


------

http://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofEngland/The-East-India-Company/

brief history of East India Company


http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-east-india-company-destroyed-trade-to-conquer-india-shashi-tharoor-2294784

caused "mayhem," were tyranical


http://archive.jaipurliteraturefestival.org/95-the-dishonourable-company-how-the-east-india-company-took-over-india/
	We still talk about the British conquering India but that phrase disguises a more sinister reality. It was not the British government that seized India at the end of the 18th century but a dangerously unregulated private company run in India by an unstable sociopath and headquartered in London out of a small office occupying less than 200 yards of City street frontage. In the 18th century, the East India Company moved from being a relatively conventional corporation, trading in silks and spices, to something much odder. By the end of the 18th century, 250 East India Company clerks, backed by the military force of 20,000 locally recruited Indian soldiers, had become the effective rulers of Bengal. Soon the Company morphed from an international trading corporation into an aggressive colonial power. Using its rapidly growing security force, it swiftly succeeded in subduing and seizing an entire subcontinent. How did this happen? Giles Milton, John Keay, Jon Wilson, Linda Colley and Shashi Tharoor discuss the rise of the Dishonourable Company and its legacy with William Dalrymple.



east india company, weird, ran by "unstable sociopath," took over india

I think had a lot of influence over British government too?

seems like being a "company" and would let them get away with more dirty things

like if it were British gov directly doing this, British citizens would be more disgusted



------


https://www.amazon.co.uk/Shadow-Great-Game-Untold-Partition/dp/8172238746
	The Shadow of the Great Game: The Untold Story of India's Partition

	Realizing that Indian nationalists would not play the Great Game against the Soviet Union, the British settled for those willing to do so, using Islam as a political tool in pursuit of their objectives. How this operation was conceived and carried out forms the theme of this untold story of India's partition. Narendra Singh Sarila unearths top-secret documents which throw new light on several prominent political figures of the era, while bringing out little-known facts about the pressure that the US exerted on Britain to grant India her independence.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_of_India
	The Partition of India was the division of British India[a] in 1947 which accompanied the creation of two independent dominions, India and Pakistan.[1] The Dominion of India is today the Republic of India, and the Dominion of Pakistan is today the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the People's Republic of Bangladesh. The partition involved the division of three provinces, Assam, Bengal and the Punjab, based on district-wide Hindu or Muslim majorities. The boundary demarcating India and Pakistan became known as the Radcliffe Line. It also involved the division of the British Indian Army, the Royal Indian Navy, the Indian Civil Service, the railways, and the central treasury, between the two new dominions. The partition was set forth in the Indian Independence Act 1947 and resulted in the dissolution of the British Raj, as the British government there was called. The two self-governing countries of Pakistan and India legally came into existence at midnight on 14–15 August 1947.[2]

	The partition displaced over 14 million people along religious lines, creating overwhelming refugee crises in the newly constituted dominions; there was large-scale violence, with estimates of loss of life accompanying or preceding the partition disputed and varying between several hundred thousand and two million.[3][b] The violent nature of the partition created an atmosphere of hostility and suspicion between India and Pakistan that plagues their relationship to the present.


some "political figures" in British empire helping divide India and Pakistan?



------


https://www.rbth.com/arts/history/2016/09/19/how-the-great-game-began-origins-in-early-indian-campaigns_631229
	The French Emperor decided to involve Russia in his plans. Russia had, by then, severed ties with the UK because of the occupation of Malta by the British. This action angered the Russian Emperor Paul I, who also held the title of Grand Master of the Order of Malta. Since Napoleon and Paul I now had the same enemy, the idea of ​​joining forces naturally arose.

	...The Russian-French campaign frightened the British so badly, that they decided to organize a coup in Russia. Emperor Paul I was killed on March 24, 1801. Napoleon was convinced that the murder was organized by the British, and many modern historians agree with this.



------

https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/modern-asian-studies/article/beyond-the-great-game-the-russian-origins-of-the-second-angloafghan-war/EDA373A5193BED58359DD9A6DF1FFE34
	...What at first seems like a classic ‘Great Game’ episode was a tale of blundering and unintended consequences on both sides...


or was it???

apparently there's such a thing as a "classic great game episode" involving deliberately tricking people into starting wars

probably would be good to study great game

would be how british and russian intelligence and intelligentsia would recruit each other, learn from each other, or get to hate each other

recruit a bunch of spies on both sides and get them experienced

get everyone used to fooling each other


http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1992-09-30/features/9203280884_1_peter-hopkirk-russian-territory-great-game
	From the end of the Napoleonic era to the eve of World War I, Russia and England engaged in a protracted struggle among the mountains of Central Asia popularly known from some lines of Rudyard Kipling:

	``Now I shall go far and far into the North, playing the Great Game.``

	Kipling, the great poet champion of imperialism, borrowed the phrase from one of the game`s most ardent players, Captain Arthur Conolly, who was beheaded by the Emir of Bokhara in 1842 while trying to establish British control over that waystop on the ancient caravan route between China and the Near East.

	Like the Cold War, the Great Game was largely a proxy battle whose protagonists rarely confronted each other directly. Instead, English and Russian armies fought inumerable campaigns against the Muslim princes whose territories separated Russia from India, the crown jewel of the British Empire.

	``With the benefit of hindsight,`` notes Peter Hopkirk, author of the

	``Great Game,`` ``modern historians may question whether there was ever any real Russian threat to India, so immense were the obstacles that an invasion force would first have had to overcome.``

	But several generations of British statesmen and army officers thought the danger was real. Their Russian counterparts were plagued by morbid fears of British designs on Russian territory.

	``They will attempt to extend their influence to Kashgat, Persia, and all the Central Asian States bordering on us,`` a Russian newspaper warned its readers of England`s ambitions, ``and then will pose a direct threat to our interests in Asia.``

	Modivated by such suspicions, the game`s players progressively annexed most of the formerly independent powers of Central Asia.


were these motivations realistic?

I guess if they'd all read "the prince" it would be understood their motives were grabbing power


	...Yet neither side had trouble finding recruits. Russians and Englishmen donned native garb to undertake spying missions among Muslim peoples fiercely hostile to outsiders. During the Victorian Era, the naturally adventurous were morally reinforced by a conviction that they were doing God`s work by bringing European rule to the peoples of Asia.

	``Those were the days of supreme imperial confidence, unashamed patriotism and an unswerving belief in the superiority of Christian civilisation over all others,`` Hopkirk notes.


I guess recruited a lot of spies during great game. British spies said to be motivated by "doing God's work" in Asia


	The Great Game ended in a draw when Russia had to resign from the conflict after her defeat, in another imperial stuggle, by Japan in 1907. England and Russia agreeded to let neutral Afghanistan be a buffer zone between their Asian territories. Afterward, as Hopkirk notes, the Great Game was quickly entombed in ``unread memoirs, the occasional place name, and in the yellowing intelligence reports of that long-forgotten adventure.``


ended by Russo-Japanese war in 1907? there were weird things going on with that though

Hopkirk (wrote book on it) says there are lots of memiors and intel reports on it available to read--maybe more accessible than Cold War?




------


https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/unique-everybody-else/201612/are-psychopaths-really-smarter-the-rest-us
	What these studies suggest is that, although intelligence is highly valued, lay people may be concerned that highly intelligent people are more inclined to the dark side. This could help explain the misconception that psychopaths are highly intelligent, although admittedly this is speculative. Certainly, people of high intelligence have the potential to abuse their gifts for nefarious purposes: Evil geniuses do exist. Perhaps then it might be fair to say that highly intelligent people are not more likely than others to turn evil, but when they do, their potential for doing harm might be amplified due to greater mental ability.


hehehe no kidding...