
https://archive.org/stream/YuriBezmenovBlackIsBeautifulCommunismIsNot/YuriBezmenovBlackIsBeautiful_djvu.txt
	The principle of subversion was formu- lated by a Chinese philosopher 2,500 years ago. Sun Tzu said, ' 'All warfare is based primarily on deception of your enemy. To fight on the battlefield to achieve your goals is the most primitive and barbaric to achieve your goals. The highest art of war is not to fight at all, but to subvert anything of value in your enemy's country." Which includes relig- ion, moral principles, traditions, and nat- ural established relationships between people, families, groups, classes, races. Turn the blacks against the whites; turn the teachers against students; turn Ralph Nader against the government; labor un- ions against business; homosexuals against heterosexuals; and keep on fight- ing, my dear friends, until you demoralize and destabilize yourself and then you flop like a rotten apple and the enemy will take you over. You will invite the enemy. 


bezmenov decided active measures goal was to divide people after working at RIA novosti, but didn't think KGB had "thousands of agents" in the West since they would defect.

	...Discontented people produce less. Low- er productivity creates economic instabil- ity and social unrest. This leads to radical- ism because people become impatient. That leads to power struggles. Power struggles lead to replacement of social, political structure. That replacement is the fastest way to internal upheaval, civil war, or invasion. The result for the last observ- able 35 years is always the same — closed society. Just the opposite of what we started with. Everything is nationalized, from banks to washrooms. Human beings belong to the state.


I think he's talking about what he saw in the cold war?


	...Your media lies to you. Why? Media is a part of the process of demoralization. They are monopolized today. They are controlled by the same group of people, unelected, super-rich and super-powerful people who trade with murders of my na- tion in the Kremlin. Interesting isn't it? With one hand these people send your boys to Vietnam for 12 years. With the other hand they send billions of dollars of credit to the Soviet government to build weapons to kill your boys in Vietnam. Imagine, when people make a mistake once and repeat this mistake — repeats the same mis- take three times, we call him a dangerous idiot. What would you call people in your establishment who repeat the same mis- take, aiding your enemy and the enemy of my people in the Kremlin, over and over again for 68 years? Traitors. And they control your media.


------


https://archive.org/details/BezmenovWorldThoughtPolice1986

	I worked for the Devil and he was a 
bore and mediocrity. Although the 
methods and goals of Novosti are devi- 
lishly evil, its daily routine is so boring 
that it does not produce outrage. It 
simply debilitates. For those in the 
West (and East), whose knowledge of 
our system is based on spy thrillers, the 
reality is much less exciting. If the free 
world wants to survive, it has to mobi- 
lize itself to take dominion over this 
deadly dangerous disease called in 
APN's newspeak "ideological subversion.


	During the last months of my career with Novosti, while contem- 
plating defection, I often tried to assess the volume of evil 1 personal- 
ly contributed to that done by my organization and my country. Was 
I really that guilty? Why should I feel guilty at all? My Soviet col- 
leagues did not feel uncomfortable with their share of guilt. Neither 
did the foreign collaborators of Novosti. Nor the intellectuals and 
"progressive" Indians receiving our "blood money" in the form of 
some fraud like the "Jawaharlal Nehru Peace Prize" Then how 
come, 1 thought, I single out myself for doing the evil? 

	Observing the world-wide destruction of human minds caused by 
my motherland, unresisted and unpunished, and meditating about 
how easily all that mind-warping could be stopped, I wanted to 
believe that there, in the West, some people and organizations we call 
11 reactionary circles" know the situation and how to deal with our sub- 
version. They had not done it, for some reason unknown to me at 
that time. But when needed, I thought, they would stop us, for their 
own good.



I think what's going on is Bezmenov is a guy who likes to theorize, analyze what he knows to be propaganda and figure out what it's doing. He would have a clear opportunity to do that from his position at RIA Novosti.

It sounds like he's saying he didn't realize what he and his coworkers were doing until he saw the big picture, and its easy to feel like his contribution is a drop in the bucket.

He shows some disdain for "reactionary circles" (I guess HUAC, that kind of thing?). Did he suspect them of being agents too?


	
	Later, in India, 1 was surprised to realize that no one even thought 
we were doing anything wrong to their country. Are they blind and 
deaf? Or is there something that makes them unaware of impending 
danger? "I must defect and open up their eyes", I thought. So I defec- 
ted and started trying to open up their eyes. But no one wanted either 
my information, or to open up their eyes. People prefer to remain 
comfortably, blissfully unaware of things unpleasant. When I arrived 
in Canada 1 used to bother all sorts of supposedly knowledgeable 
people: the CIA, the media, politicians, "kremlinologists"and politi- 
cal scientists. And finally 1 realized that despite the abundance of 
reliable data, most of them simply don't CARE. "We don't give a 
damn", as my former boss at Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
said to me when I presented him my ideas on ideological subversion. 
They are "sitting pretty". Wars are being fought somewhere far away 
from their three-bedroom homes. They dazzle the public (and them- 
selves) with all sorts of illusions such as "peace talks", SALT agree- 
ments, detente, etc. Some of the people 1 talked to were simply en- 
feebled snobs who wanted to be regarded as energetic and knowl- 
edgeable protectors of public interests (whatever that may mean). 
My impression is that they are mainly concerned with their own 
interests, their pathetic self importance. "What can we do about half 
of Cambodia being MURDERED?" Really, WHAT? 


Bezmenov says his goal is to "open the eyes" of people being fooled by active measures.

Bezmenov went to many different people with his theories of "ideological subversion" who should have been interested (apparently the "reactionary circles"), but found them uninterested. He theorized that they didn't care or were simply more interested in themselves than the rest of the world.


	No, there are no "reactionary circles" hysterical about Communist 
genocide in Asia, Africa and Latin America. There are circles hyste- 
rical about apartheid in South Africa though. Hipocrites! The most 
"reactionary" and "hysterically" so, are the Western lib-leftist litera- 
ti, usurping well-salaried positions in the civil services, bureaucra- 
tized media monopoly, academia — everywhere the public opinion is 
being forged and forced. It was these people who discouraged and 
obstructed publication of this material IN ANY FORM for almost a 
decade of "detente" It was a well-educated ignoramus in one of the 
Western centers of "Sovietology "who wrote me that the information 
in my book is "obsolete and outdated." One thing he should have 
known: nothing is outdated if we talk about the goals and methods of 
KGB-Novosti. Nothing has changed since the Chinese genius of 
subversion Sun-Tzu for the last 2,500 years of human history. Some 
of the nameplates on the doors of Novosti's bosses may have become 
obsolete though, and some of statistics (but again, always on the 
rise). Some new names have been added to the list of Novosti cor- 
respondents expelled from some countries for espionage and sub- 
version . But what 1 have written about Novosti will not become out- 
dated until and unless Novosti itself disappears, together with the 
whole Soviet regime and the "World Communist Movement". Until 
that time my book will remain an accurate, though impressionistic 
and highly opinionated, description of the largest subversion system 
in the history of mankind.


Bezmenov says some of the "enfeebled snobs" he talked to were selective about which world atrocities they cared about or turned a blind eye to some, particularly ones inconvenient for Soviet narratives.

Bezmenov seems to know he's "impressionistic and opinionated," but goes along with that in his writings. Why? one guess is he wants it to be more accessible to average reader, not a highly technical document.


	Of course, I present only a part of the whole picture. I have a suspi- 
cion that no one, including Novosti's top brass, knows the complete 
picture. In the Soviet secrecy-maniacal society it is typical for a right 
hand not to know what the left one is doing. My purpose here is not 
to present academic research on the Novosti Press Agency and the 
KGB (although some of my chapters may look as boring and as 
informative as that). My intention is to give you both feeling and 
substance in a somewhat personalized form. This is a narration, a 
collection of facts, stories, boring statistics and funny rumors, pro- 
found statements and superficial observations, moral assessments 
and dirty jokes — all put together for one purpose: to help you to 
realize that you, the people, are being had by the Soviets, and seem to 
enjoy it. The sooner you will realize that, the better chances for your 
survival in the "Bright Future for All Mankind" (Soviet expression 
meaning — One World System controlled, naturally, by the "Big 
Brother"). 



seems pretty likely that Bezmenov is piecing this together from his experiences and observations at KGB, and not from any documents of secret plans or anything like that.

Says in KGB "left hand does not know what right hand is doing," posits even "top brass" don't know whole story--a hierarchy of fools.


	...From the very moment of its foundation „ APN was subordinated, 
in fact, to two bosses; the Department of Agitation and Propaganda 
of the Central Committee of the CPSU (Agitprop), and the Depart- 
ment of Disinformation of the KGB, for the purpose of planning, 
coordinating and conducting active measures against the public and 
governments in non-Soviet (not controlled by the Soviets or their 
surrogates) countries, mainly through the media of these countries. 


says APN's purpose is active measures through media in target countries


	The targets for APN-KGB manipulation also include public and 
political organizations, religious groups, educational systems, the 
entertainment industry (cinematography, TV, companies promoting 
"cultural exchange," etc.), as well as individuals: politicians, mem- 
bers of parliament, bureaucrats of civil service, labor union activists 
and leaders, businessmen, publishers, intellectuals (university pro- 
fessors, writers, scientists) — in other word, everyone who is or could 
be an influential person, able to shape public opinion and the policies 
of his (or her) nation on the level of both their attitudes (and patterns 
of behavior) and decision making. 


says scope is broad, recruit anyone who could be in position of influence (or infiltrate those positions)

focus on level of attitudes, "patterns of behavior," and decision making


	...Propaganda of Marxism-Leninism as such (or the "advantages" of 
Socialism and a "planned economy") and denunciation of "decadent 
Western imperialism" are only a part of NovostPs activity. At the 
time of Novosti's foundation, the new post-Stalin era was demanding 
new methods and approaches. Frontal attacks on Western ideology 
had often proven to be ineffective and even counter-productive, 
especially in the "Third World" developing countries of Asia, Africa 
and Latin America. The modern age of communication dictated the 
necessity of a more subtle and sophisticated approach to public 
opinion outside of the USSR. The short-term process of subversion 
of key personalities in foreign countries had to be combined with a 
long-term, but more effective and irreversible process of changing 
the perception of reality in the minds of millions of voters in pluralis- 
tic societies.



is Bezmenov saying this is a new approach? "post Stalin?" also says its an old technique since 2,500 years ago

can see what looks like active measures 100 years ago and before that--Beletskii's "social experiments" in Russia, Bolshevik-Menshevik split, and a lot going on in WW1 (media promoting nationalism, fatalist ideas leading up to the war, exploiting war to spread communist ideas) 


	Under Yuri Andropov, the new generation of the KGB's "public 
relations" experts started to emerge: highly educated and well- 
trained graduates from Soviet schools, fluently speaking two or more 
languages, familiar with the history, literature, religion, ways of life, 
and socio-political structures of the target countries. 

	That was the time of the new "general line" of the CPSU CC 
(Central Committee). A new propaganda cliche was coined — a 
"third way" of development for former colonies of the West (non- 
communist, and yet non-capitalist, but definitely an "anti- 
imperialist," mainly anti-American, way of development). Imple- 
mentation of such a policy required thousands of professional media 
workers, well trained in the Western style of reporting and in the pro- 
cessing of information and presentation of opinions and ideas in the 
most effective emotional way, appealing to the most basic, 
fundamental and primitive instincts of humans: fear (of nuclear war 
and /or nuclear confrontation with the USSR); self-preservation 
(would you rather live in a "cruel, polluted, profit-oriented capitalis- 
tic society" or in a "scientifically planned, rational, pollution-free, 
kind society with just re-distribution of wealth"); and love (of child- 
ren, motherhood, peace, friends, class and race brothers, etc.) 


says Andropov started professionally training agents in manipulating people via press under KGB



	At that time the ideologues and experts of the CPSU CC had 
worked out a new line for the KGB operations which later became 
known as "active measures." These measures had little to do with the 
classic, romantic style of espionage and subversion of Stalin's era. 
Reliable sources confirm my estimate that only about 1 5% to 20% of 
the time, money and labor force was planned to be used by the KGB's 
affiliates such as Novosti for "James Bond" type espionage. The 
remaining 80% of the effort was directed to the creation of an ideolo- 
gical climate in the target countries which would enable Soviet agents 
of influence simply to buy (or "borrow") the required intelligence 
data, using mostly rather legitimate and overt methods. i s. 

The ultimate objective of the new policy and of the activity of such"^ 
an instrument of this policy as the Novosti Press Agency is not to 
learn more secrets about the adversary, and not even to teach the 
masses in the West in the spirit of Marxist-Leninist ideology, but to 

Slowly replace the free-market capitalist society, with its individual 
freedoms in economic and socio-political spheres of life — with a 
carbon copy of the "most progressive" system, and eventually merge ^ 
into one world-wide system ruled by a benevolent bureaucracy which 

/ they call Socialism (or Communism, as the final and supreme stage 

I of this "progress"). 

^ To effect this gradual change, it is much easier and less painful 
(and less noticeable for the populace) to change the perceptions of \ 
reality, attitudes, patterns of behavior and to create wide-spread/ 
demands and expectations, leading ultimately to the acceptance of 
totalitarianism. Thus the media is the main target of manipulation by 
the KGB-controlled "independent, non-government, non-political, 
public organization" known as the Novosti Press Agency.



Bezmenov believed the goal of the KGB was world communism

He says the subversion techniques used by the KGB played into this goal, although it's not clear how.

maybe more accurate to say that he believes their goal was world totalitarianism

says media "main target" of KGB


	...Domestic services of APN are meant to play only an 
auxiliary role of "fabricating the truth" about the beautiful Soviet 
Socialism, re-circulating some of the foreign news and features in the 
local Soviet media and publishing Western "progressive" writers 
(such as British James Oldridge; Finnish Marti Larnee; Chilean 
Pablo Neruda; Canadian Farley Mowatt, etc.)


names some journalist he's apparently suspicious of


	...Even the most sophisticated and attractive propaganda has little 
chance to influence the public unless and until it is actively promoted 
or "sold" by an army of "Public Relations Officers" of APN-KGB. 
And Novosti propaganda is NOT attractive. When I was concocting 
stories and backgrounders for the foreign media, sitting at my desk at 
the headquarters of Novosti in Moscow, I simply refused to believe 
that my boring stuff could be of any interest to anyone in the free 
world, least of all to convince anyone of the "advantages of Social- 
ism" and even motivate anyone in the "struggle for progress and 
social change." I was wrong. I did not realize at that time, that before 
my article would reach the page of a foreign newspaper, it had to 
travel a long way through the sewers of the APN-KGB system, and 
then, nicely packaged, be presented to an editor or a commentator in 
a foreign capital after a long process of cultivating that editor. 

After initiation into the secrets of the APN kitchen, I was given 
extensive training in P.R. activity with numerous delegations of 
foreign guests of Novosti visiting the USSR. A typical "package 
tour" would include not only regular visits to "average" collective 
farms and kindergartens, talking to smiling milkmaids and to nicely- 
dressed Eskimos who spoke fluent English and played the grand 
piano in the woods in Siberia. More importantly, every foreign guest 
must be made a part of the process of deception. And that takes a 
person like myself: easy-going, friendly, knowledgeable about the 
country of my guest, with a small weakness for foreign liquors, slight- 
ly cynical about the thugs in the Politbureau, able to crack an 
anti-Soviet joke at an appropriate moment, but above all, able to 
arrange meetings with newsmakers, people who are usually un- 
available to an average journalist. 


describes cultivating editors and newsmakers in a cynical way


	...It all depends on a foreign counterpart's motivation, on his (or her) 
personal interests, moral standards, and integrity (or lack thereof), 
whether they will go along with the APN contact and pretend it is just 
"business as usual," or resist manipulation or even reject the 
"arrangement." In my own practice and throughout my 12-year 
career with the Novosti, I have seldom met foreigners who would 
refuse to cooperate categorically. Most of my guests or foreign con- 
tacts would prefer to go ahead, hoping that they were smart enough 
to see through the trickery and at the right moment stop short of 
becoming a collaborator with APN-KGB. Most of them did not 
stop.


sounds like Bezmenov had some experience analyzing influential foreigners motivation, interests, moral standards, integrity, to find ways to influence them.


goes on to describe how Novosti hires (suggests nepotism)


	...On returning from my first assignment to India in December of 
1965, 1 found half of my schoolmates in Novosti. They held first place 
among the younger generation of ideological subversives. Later we 
also established the record for number of defectors to the West. 


wonder why that is?


	...The main core of "journalists-internationalists" consisted of about 
500 highly educated and well-travelled men and women, each 
speaking at least two foreign languages. Of these, about 100, working 
in Novosti's headquarters in Pushkin square, belonged to the "New 
class" of nomenklatura in 1 965. Need less to say, getting in there was 
the ultimate goal of most Novosti staffers. 


small group formed "main core" (what did they do?)


	Apart from easy work and high monetary gains, Novosti offered a 
number of other benefits, extremely attractive in Soviet conditions: 
proximity to ideological power and access to uncensored informa- 
tion (the second most desirable currency in the USSR after the 
American dollar). There is the possibility of travel abroad (and defec- 
tion); and one may create for oneself and family a way of life resem- 
bling that of the West (so, thee is no need to defect). For sociable 
people, Novosti offers the chance to meet very interesting people, 
including sons and daughters of high-ranking Soviet officials. For a 
commoner a marriage into a nomenklatura family means speedy 
promotion and a secure career. Finally, for Soviet hedonists, Novosti 
gives a chance to enjoy such forbidden pleasures as casual sex, some- 
times with foreigners (when working for KGB); indulgence in 
drinking and drugs; and the accumulation of foreign objects, from 
cigarette lighters to cars. 

If for nomenklatura and loafers Novosti offers a relatively com- 
fortable life with a touch of "creativity," for idealists APN may pro- 
vide the illusion that one is doing something for "peace and under- 
standing. 1 ' I knew a number of junior colleagues, who though reali- 
zing the sinister nature of Novosti, still hoped that after obtaining 
some power they would "change the system from within. M These 
people had a tough time preserving their ideals, integrity and sanity. 
Many made the painful transition from high idealism to deep cyni- 
cism. Only a negligible minority of "true comrades"could stubbornly 
believe in the possibility of "socialism with a human face/" These 
would not advance: the Party does not need such dedicated idiots in 
its higher ranks. 1 do not remember an instance of an honest man 
atop Novosti. What I do remember is the fact commonly known in 
Moscow, that Novosti perhaps holds first place in the number of 
mentally ill, alcoholics, sadists, masochists, schizoids, grapho- 
maniacs, etc., and is something of an asylum for all sorts of mental 
cases never reported to the Serbski Institute — that is, as long as they 
continue to pretend to be loyal to the Power. And these are the cadres 
who "decide all" in the business of ideological warfare against the rest 
of the world. 


Novosti had perks that could make employees less likely to defect. Bezmenov saw some "idealistic" people hoping to change system from within, but saw that they wouldn't preserve their ideals or sanity and would not be promoted. "I do not remember an instance of an honest man atop Novosti"


	...In the Central Committee's apparatus there is a large group of 
referents, comrades responsible for the ideological brainwashing of 
mankind. Unsuspecting people throughout the world are born and 
die, eat or starve, make love or war, supposedly in strict accordance 
with the plans of the Central Committee of CPSU, elaborated by the 
referents. I met several comrades responsible for the Indian subcon- 
tinent. One was called Kutzobin, a skinny, sickly fellow of about 60, 
then head of the Indian section. Another was Yakunin, a tall, blue- 
eyed Aryan of about 45. Later, one of our Novosti men, character- 
istically my former schoolmate, Vadim Smirnov, joined the CCs 
Indian section and was placed in charge of the very same thing he had 
previously done, in India, at the orders of others. 

Some of the referents are known KGB agents and informers. This 
fact does not bother either the Central Committee or, for that matter, 
the governments, parliaments, security services and media, of 
countries where the comrades are accepted and accredited as 
diplomats and journalists. 

Naturally, the responsibility for the Communist remaking of the 
world is shared by the Central Committee with the "progressive"and 
"realistically minded" representatives of foreign media, actively cul- 
tivated by the APN and KGB.



says a small group of people, some KGB, are responsible for "remaking the world"



	...On October 27, 1967, 1 brought a large group of editors and 
publishers of India's leftist and Communist papers to the Central 
Committee to meet comrade Yakunin; and later comrade Ulyanov- 
ski, a boss in Agitprop. The Indians had just finished a three-week 
tour of the Soviet Union. 1 showed them all the "typical" collective 
farms and kindergartens Novosti could arrange, and the comrades 
were full of impressions and "provocative questions." They were 
what we call "unscared idiots" and "truthseekers," who wanted to 
show they took our propaganda seriously and expected us to do what 
we preach. They looked as if they believed they were invited to 
Moscow to exchange opinions. 

Why, they asked, does Novosti use such incomprehensible lan- 
guage in propaganda literature? Isn't it possible to explain the advan- 
tages of socialism to the Indian masses in plain language? Why is the 
artistic form in the USSR always a standard Russian-bourgeois, 
whether the content is socialistic (as in the opera about an Uzbek 
collective farmer), or capitalistic (as in "Swan Lake 1 ')? Why had the 
Soviets selected from all the many Indian movie-makers a vulgar and 
trivial profiteer, Raj Kapur, and neglected a progressive realist, 
Satyajit Roy, who had won the film festival prize? 

The general secretary of the Communist Party of Gujarat state, 
comrade P.B. Vaidhya, asked questions for which a Soviet comrade 
would get into deep trouble. Why, he asked, do Novosti and other 
Soviet public organizations in India fraternize with radical students 
on one extreme, and capitalist politicians on the other? The majority 
of young Indians, he said, wants to know more about the Mother- 
land of Socialism, but they are ignored. It seems too, said another 
Indian guest, that the CPSU is reluctant to expose Soviet youth to 
Indian culture: the sitar player Ravi Shankar gathers hundreds of 
thousands of young listeners in the USA, but in Moscow he was 
allowed to play only to a handful of Komsomol members in a tiny 
hall of the Soviet Composers Club. Why? 

Comrade Vaidhya was very critical of Soviet scientists, too. In the 
Institute of Peoples of Asia, he said, there are dozens of Soviet indo- 
logists with academic degrees and volumes of published works, but 
they never visit India, do not speak Indian languages, and do not 
bother to attend any international conferences. Instead, year after 
year Indian colleagues see the same Soviet functionaries, acting as 
scholars, visiting Delhi, often on very unscientific missions. Why? 

Comrade Gopalan, a member of CPTs Central Committee, ven- 
tured into areas other than arts and sciences. 1 noticed that he made 
the Soviet apparatchiks rather nervous by asking repeatedly in what 
specific way Soviet workers participate in the administration of 
Soviet industry. Also he was interested in how the Central Commit- 
tee resolves conflicts between federalism and self-government in, say, 
the Ukraine, Asian Republics and Baltic "states." 
/" The answers of the CC comrades were cynical and straightfor- 
l ward. The Indian comrades were told that it is not Agitprop which 
must learn the "plain language" of the developing masses, but the 
masses who must learn the future language of all mankind: the 
lajiguage of scientific. Communism . Artistic forms, cultural 
exchange, youth contacts, they were told, are the concerns of the 
Central Committee only so much as they contribute to the "struggle 
for peace and progress" (which includes cultivating radicals and 
terx&ti&ts to destabilize your country, making your capitalists pay for 
it, and your politicians legitimize it). Workers in the USSR, they 
were told, are to work first, and then to "participate. " As to the "con- 
flict" between Moscow and national republics — it simply does not 
exist. 

My job, as a Novosti guide, was to popularize these Party direc- 
tives to our guests, and as a KGB cooperative, to notice and report 
the reaction of the guests, and the degree of their loyalty (or hypocri- 
cy). With each visit to the top, our developing little brothers shed 
more of their naivete and acquired more understanding that being a 
fellow-traveller is a serious and full-time job, and often hazardous. 
Like recruits to the Mafia, our guests were made to realize that they 
could not "retire/' Fortunately, I was able to report "mutual under- 
standing" and "gratitude/'



KGB "fellow travellers" were told they could not "retire"--creating an excuse to kill them if they grow a conscience?



	Most foreign media people, not to mention average readers, gross- 
ly misconceive the nature of the APN-KGB relationship in partic- 
ular, and the relationship between Soviet journalists and Soviet intel- 
ligence services in general. This general misconception is obvious to 
me, now that I have been some years in the West, and have revealed 
details about my own and my Novosti colleagues' activities to several 
seemingly intelligent Western reporters. All of them, both "leftists" 
and "rightists," made the same mistake, calling me a "former Russian 
spy," which sounds very romantic, and, depending on one's political 
affiliation, either complimentary or derogatory. It is very far from 
reality. 

Spying, in the classical sense of the term, is the ancient occupation 
of stealing secret information, or buying it for money or favors, and 
making it available to one's government, superiors, or a client who 
pays for it. Spying in itself is a profession, just like any other, re- 
quiring training and experience. By itself it is void of any moral or 
ethical connotation. Spying can be noble and patriotic, if it serves the 
cause of the security and prosperity of one's nation, and does not 
harm friends. It can be defensive, if it helps to protect one's country 
or one's friends from an aggressor. But spying can also be vile, 
treacherous and offensive, when it helps an aggressor, invader or 
robber of one's own people, or a friendly and peaceful neighbor. 

Depending on the amount of money or support, and on the state of 
counter-intelligence in an area, spying can be dangerous and risky. It 
can also be a safe and pleasant indulgence in all imaginable sins 

But, whatever spying is, Novosti people do not do it for the KGB 
more than 10% of the time. Most of Novosti 's work is s u bversion^ by 
definition always immoral, aggressive, dishonest and unpatriotic 
(the latter, because in most cases subversion hurts people in one's 
own country as much as the real or imaginary enemy is hurt). The 
Novosti specialty is ideological subversion, which often has nothing 
to do with either secret information or stealing. 



says subversion is hard to justify



	Thanks to the permissive legal systems in most democratic coun- 
tries (as well as in some right-wing "fascist and racist" regimes), the 
activity of Novosti-KGB agent is not considered criminal or even 
anti-social. Thus, we cannot be called spies: we do not risk anything, 
least of all our lives, in a country of the "decadent capitalist camp." 
The greatest danger to ourselves comes not from the counter-intel- 
ligence services, the police or the courts, but from our over-indul- 
gence in alcohol, sex, food, and from driving too fast. Few Novosti 
men have ever been apprehended as spies and expelled from foreign 
countries (and then mainly from "developing" ones!). It is a rare case 
when a real KGB spy, pretending to be a Novosti journalist, is caught 
red-handed. 


but says actual people writing propaganda can get away with it--it's not stealing anyhting, just creating information


(not sure about efforts to supress contravening narratives... are those legal too? clearly, threatening or murdering journalists isn't legal. What about e.g. flooding online comment sections with spam and downvoting everything else?)


	...Not too many people in the free world (free from the Soviets) want 
to understand the danger of APN-KGB ideological subversion. 
Every Novosti staffer, engaged in KGB work, knows otherwise. We 
seldom had illusions about the true nature of our activity; we could 
i easily observe the horrible results of it. For this reason some of us 
Iwould be burdened with guilt, and seek refuge in cynicism or in the 
iaccumulation of posessions, or in sex, alcohol, and drugs. The 
majority, though, overcome pangs of conscience, and enjoy the 
comforts of KGB affiliation. It goes without saying, of course, that 
only a few Novosti staffers, mainly relatives of the nomenklatura, 
dare to say "no" to the KGB. 


Bezmenov says others working at Novosti noticed effects of their work and some became burdened with guilt. Most "overcame pangs of conscience" and enjoyed the perks of working with KGB.


goes on to describe relationship between KGB and Novosti

says Novosti looked up to some of the "elite" KGB officers and wanted to be noticed by them, join


	...Like most of his colleagues, the other KGB old-timers, Uncle 
Vasya never said a word about his past career. No wonder. These 
days Novosti employs quite a number of children of posthumously 
"rehabilitated enemies of the people," liquidated under Stalin. 
Reminiscences about the old days might result in severe fractures to 
Uncle Vasya 's skull. It should be remembered that every second 
family of an intellectual, writer, journalist, etc., lost at least one rela- 
tive to the GULAG death camps or Lubyanka's shooting ranges. 
This is one reason the old guards keep wisely silent, opening doors 
for the children of their victims, the Novosti's "new class." Some of 
the KGB's victims' children are now KGB themselves.


interesting--Stalin go too far, even by KGB standards?


	Naturally, we despised and avoided those who, unlike us, were 
stukachi — lower-grade sleuths and informers, provocateurs and 
subverters of our own Novosti personnel. Even lower, in our estima- 
tion, but somewhat more attractive, was the last category of Novosti- 
KGB: lastochki, single girls employed by the APN not so much for 
what they were doing officially during the daytime — typing, filing, 
editing copy — as for their ability to combine the three most ancient 
professions: espionage, prostitution and journalism. They knew that 
we, the male chauvinists of Novosti, had a long-established unwrit- 
ten rule: never get involved with a Novosti girl, or you will give the 
KGB an easy time collecting information about you. Only those 
comrades with high Party standing could occasionally violate this 
rule, for the cause of the Pary, no doubt. 


KGB also spying, informing, provoking Novosti staff, Novosti didn't like these

apparently, provocateurs are "low" at KGB?

goes on to say KGB agents got special treatment, money, access


	...Most of these things are easily observed by anyone with minimum 
intelligence and knowledge of the Soviet system. One principle 
remains true all through: anyone employed by a media organ of 
ideological significance (unlike, say, a magazine on fishery), and 
dealing with foreign media and their representatives, automatically 
falls under KGB control. There is simply no such thing, in the 
Motherland of Socialism, as a journalist in the international arena 
independent of the KGB. 



KGB would control any media of "ideological significance" targetting foreigners



goes on to describe how Novosti would use foreign publications to influence Soviet citizens


	...The impact of such propaganda on the Soviet public opinion is 
substantial. If not the content itself, then the mere fact of its exist- 
ence, unpunished and unopposed by the Free World, impresses an 
uninformed Soviet reader in favor of the "historically inevitable 
advance of Communism the world over." In combination with 
"straight" news about various "majority rule" and "anti-colonial" 
wars successfully waged by the Soviet-trained and indoctrinated 
terrorists forces in Asia, Africa and Latin America, this further con- 
vinces the Soviet public, even those who have access to short-wave 
foreign broadcasts, that Communism IS victorious, invincible and 
desired by millions of their "developing" brothers. The final and 
tragic result of it for the Soviet people is that if and when a Soviet 
soldier were given an order to "liberate" Afghanistan, Angola or El 
Salvador, he would do it with unprecedented cruelty, in direct pro- 
portion to his ignorance and the volume of propaganda pumped into 
him, thanks to the vicious circle of untruth. 


believing people actually wanted communism made it easier for soldiers to invade to "liberate" countries


	The "reactionary" media, not under the direct control of Com- 
munists or the KGB, also renders a great service to Novosti by focus- 
ing its attention mainly on bad news as though it were the only news 
fit to print. Such sensational stories as Watergate, CI A wrongdoings, 
the Pentagon Papers, etc., forcibly fed to the public, are a great 
inspiration for the APN, but contribute hardly anything to the resto- 
ration of justice in America. Most of the materials of that type were 
reprocessed by a special Department of Political Publications 
(GRPP), headed in the 196(Ts by Norman Borodin, a KGB disinfor- 
mation expert.


I guess by "reactionary" media Bezmenov means what West calls mainstream media. Bezmenov says Western media not under direct control of KGB.


goes on to talk about soviet propaganda about space race

downplays soviet achievments


	To keep the hard currency rolling in, Novosti opened a special 
"space center," headed by a curly-haired young man, the son-in-law 
of a famous (but under an assumed name, for reasons of secrecy) 
Soviet space rocket designer. This curly cretin, who looked like a 
football player, walked Novosti's corridors in foreign-tailored suits, 
imitating an American movie star. From time to time he would call 
dispatch for a black Volga car with a radio-telephone to rush him at 
breakneck speed from NovostTs glass entrance to the "Star City." He 
was one of the few APN staffers privileged with a permanent pass to 
the "Star City,"a small suburban township where Soviet cosmonauts 
and their families live in conditions similar to those of American 
university students. There was no need for paranoid security 
arrangements such as tall fences with barbed wire at the top, guard 
dogs and sentries with machine guns. The Soviet space guinea-pigs 
(called "pilots" in the Western press) didn't know any secrets worth 
stealing (apart from the commonly known "secret" that the Soviet 
space research programs were designed mainly for military and 
aggressive purposes). The most insane PLO terrorist would not dare 
or bother to kidnap the cosmonauts, knowing pretty well that the 
Kremlin would not give a kopeck of ransom for the lives of the 
"pilots." The main purpose of the security was to conceal the relative 
affluence of the Star City inhabitants from the hungry stares of 
common Soviet people. They say there is a self-service gastronom 
(grocery store) where one takes as much food into a cart (a cart, not a 
bag!) as one wishes . . . 

On returning from the Star City sometimes in the company of a 
suspiciously happy foreigner or two, all of them breathing vodka, 
our curly cretin would be frantically active for a couple of days. Cosmo- 
nauts would meet foreign guests, sign autographs, give interviews 
and smile for cameramen. The result of all this farce was usually 
several articles in respectable Western magazines, such as Pari- 
MarcK with lots of photographs which made our space monkeys 
look like a hybrid of Tarzanand Einstein and Levitanand Rostropo- 
vich: they played cellos, wrote endless formulae on blackboards, 
painted imaginary scenery from distant planets, did unimaginable 
tricks on the parallel bars, and above all, were dedicated Party mem- 
bers and excellent family men. Large circulation foreign papers 
picked this up obediently, especially if we claimed that the stuff was 
"exclusive," or better yet, "secret," and de-classified only as a per- 
sonal favor of APN to George Pompidu. 

The space features supposedly written by the cosmonauts, and 
supplemented with impressive drawings and diagrams were okayed 
not by our Novosti censors, but somewhere high above, possibly by 
comrade Korolyov himself (the chief Soviet space rocket designer, 
who died in the early \910's). The stuff was written, though, not by 
any cosmonauts, but by the same curly schizoid who headed Novos- 
ti's "space center"; and far from being "exclusively" written for any 
client, it was a typical APN mass production designed to convince 
the duped Western (even more so Eastern) public of the supremacy of 
the "new man of the Communist tomorrow." 


says novosti BSed articles on space program with small team while saying they were written by cosmonauts. Cosmonauts were kept separate from the rest of Soviet society for some reason. The head of the special section for reporting on space was one of the only people who could visit them.

Bezmenov saw that Novosti would use cosmonauts for propaganda purposes, play up as image of idea "soviet supermen" while actually they were as drunk as most Soviets. This discrepency and his job lying about it might explain his cynicism about the Soviet space program.


	...Space mania lasted roughly from 1963 to 1969, the time of the 
spectacular American landing on the moon, skillfully played down 
by some Western media traitors. All these years we knew that our 
"achievements" were a bluff and could not help but feel sorry about 
the enthusiasm of the Western media.


maybe not? Soyuz rocket built in 1966, still one of (or the) most reliable rocket today.


	...Several years 
later Soviet defector L. Vladimirov-Finkelstein, former editor of a 
science magazine, tried stubbornly to break through the wall of 
naivete and ignorance of Western publishers and to reveal the truth 
about the space race in his brilliant and brutally honest book "Rus- 
sian Space Bluff." It took the US landing on the moon to make the 
West change its mind about the faked Soviet space "supremacy"and 
get rid of its inferiority complex. It only proves, to my mind, how 
deadly efficient can be Novosti's propaganda.


reading between lines, sounds like Bezmenov observed Soviet propaganda playing to Western "inferiority complex" and trying to drive the space race with its propaganda. Saw the landing on the moon as the end of the space race.


	...Apart from the subject of space, Novosti would periodically have 
fits of propaganda on various topics of "human interest. " There was 
never a lack of authors within Novosti capable of concocting any- 
thing in this area. Thus, in the mid-sixties, simultaneously with the 
KGB-inspired student riots in Western universities, Novosti un- 
folded a "Youth Campaign, " trying to prove to the decadent West 
that we do not have any "gaps" between our generations. We are 
monolithic, united and profoundly patriotic! More, we are inter- 
nationalists, always ready to extend our helping hand to all the 
oppressed youth in capitalist countries (which we did very successful- 
ly!). At the time your Jane Fondas and Pete Seagers promoted 
"peace" in Vietnam, singing: "Felix, don't be a hero, don't go to war," 
our Novosti boys were busy concocting fiery propaganda songs on 
the "liberation struggle." Partly thanks to APN and Fondas, Amer- 
ica stalemated by barefoot bandits in Asia and plunged into endless 
radical youth terrorism at home. The Novosti authors of the "youth" 
propaganda had sleepless nights and endless alcoholic cycles, bur- 
dened with guilt for what we did to the feeble minds of Western 
youth. Fondas and Seagers do not have even a hint of repentance.


interesting he'd say that


goes on to talk about influence operations in India


	...Another frequent assignment was coverage of "press conferences" 
with visiting Indian VIPs. 1 remember when, in July of 1966, Mr. 
Kumaraswami Kamaraj, an outstanding member of the Indian 
National Congress Party and an opponent of Indira Gandhi's 
faction, came to Moscow. The Kremlin wanted to cultivate him, as 
he might win the intra-party struggle for leadership and become the 
prime minister. On July 30, Novosti and Foreign Affairs staged a 
marvelous farce in the grand hall of the Metropol Hotel. 

The Indian guest pretended not to notice that "media representa- 
tives" asked him only questions which already contained answers, 
and most of the answers were in favor of Soviet foreign policy. Every 
Novosti person, including myself, prior to arriving at the Metropol, 
had been given his "questions" typed on a piece of paper, to memo- 
rize, or to read aloud if memory failed. My question was about the 
positive effect of the spirit of the Indo-Pakistani peace conference of 
Tashkent on the establishment of stability and mutual security on the 
Indian subcontinent. Getting Mr. Kamaraj's affirmative answer, 1 
simply incorporated a few of his words into an already typewritten 
"report" on the press conference. 

The next morning, Pravda and other Soviet central papers carried 
the rhapsody to Soviet peace-making efforts. And as far as 1 knew, at 
that very moment Soviet submarines were making a home in the 
Indian ports of Bombay and Visakhapatnam, Soviet air force 
advisors were training Indians to fly MIGs. and the Soviet Defense 
Ministry was pushing more and more Soviet-made military har- 
ware on both India and Pakistan, trying to make both dependent on 
our supplies. 


can see why he became disillusioned


goes on to talk about story of indian and soviet kids exhanging letters which the state tried to control


	...COLLABORATORS: WHO ARE THEY? 

It is obvious to me that even the most charming and talented P.R. 
agent of APN-KGB would fail to plant disinformation in the foreign 
media unless he were assisted by the foreign collaborators. 
Ideological subversion, it was explained to me by my KGB super- 
visors, is always a two-way street. The effectiveness of Soviet propa- 
ganda depends at least 50% on the generous aid of Novosti's foreign 
collaborators. 



Bezmenov says his KGB supervisors told him ideological subversion wouldn't work without collaboration of foreigners in press (and other areas?).



	The phenomenon of collaboration with the Soviet ideological 
"active measures" affects a wide variety of personalities, regardless of 
their nationality, ethnic and cultural background, education, level of 
intelligence, political ideas and affiliations, or social and class 
origins. 1 have come to the realization that virtually no foreigner is 
entirely immune to this infectious disease. 

It would be naive to expect that only the uneducated "proleta- 
rians" fall victim to Soviet propaganda and become "revolutiona- 
ries." As a matter of fact, my KGB supervisors explicitly instructed 
me "not to waste my time"and APN's money on the "true believers in 
Communism." My KGB contact in New Delhi, comrade Gadin, 
suggested to me, after seeing my overly friendly socialization with 
students and young Indian radicals: "Aim higher — at the upper- 
middle-class intellectuals and otherwise INFLUENTIAL personali- 
ties." True believers, he said, make the worst enemies if and when 
they become dissillusioned with Communism, or finally see through 
the deception. What KGB-APN needs is a person who would be 
ready to compromise moral principles (if he had any) for his personal 
short-term advantage. According to my observation and practice, 
such persons suffer from one or more of the following flaws in their 
characters: egoism, ethnocentrism (or bigotry), greed, mental lazi- 
nezz, cynicism, lack of confidence (or, conversely, overconfidence), 
fear (especially fear of failure or fear of appearing as "misfits" and 
underachievers in their own careers and ventures), and the inability 
to be compassionate toward the sufferings of others. Often among 
the KGB-APN collaborators I could see persons with various phy- 
siological deviations: homosexuals, impotents, or — conversely — 
persons obsessed with sex and other pleasures, persons unable to 
establish lasting and meaningful relationships with the opposite sex, 
persons unable to show or receive love, etc. On top of it all, the most 
"recruitable" people are "materialists, pragmatists," obsessed with 
the immediate and complete "success" of THEIR ventures. Another 
great category of collaborators are those who are unable to laugh at 
themselves, who take themselves too seriously. Healthy skepticism 
and a good sense of humor provide one of the best remedies against 
Novosti infection. 

1 have met scores of conceited snobbish "intellectuals, " who suf- 
fered from self-importance and firmly believed that the public in 
their own country was too backward to understand their genius. 
Novosti provides a very receptive audience for such megalo-maniacs, 
especially when they write books about their "experiences" in the 
USSR in surrealistic (or rather Social-realistic) terms. 

To sum it up, as one Russian Orthodox priest told me, "Commun- 
ism is not a political, economical, military or geographical problem. 
It is a MORAL problem." Novosti Press Agency and her KGB 
bosses will be successful in the manipulation of public opinion in the 
free world as long as there are AMORAL persons ready to cooperate 
with APN-KGB for their own immoral gains and purposes. 

The smallest category of collaborations are those who idealistical- 
ly BELIEVE that Communism (and its first "civilized" stage of 
Socialism) is indeed a "better system" and better solution for all the 
problems of mankind. After 67 years of historical evidence, after 
hundreds of MILLIONS perished under this system, in view of its 
gross inefficiency in any area of human activity (except the military, 
an aggressive one) — such idealism borders on insanity. Therefore 1 
would not take this category of collaborators seriously. Ignorance, to 
my mind, plays a major role in this type of "idealism."



the KGB instructed bezmenov to target people with sociopathic tendencies for recruitment and to forget about "true believers" in communism who followed it for idealistic purposes.

Bezmenov saw these collaboraters as cooperating for their own gain. He says the cooperation of "amoral" people is essential for active measures to work around the world, and so Communism is a moral problem, not a political or economic one.

Bezmenov saw "true believers" in Communism as the smallest category of collaborators, and questioned their intelligence and sanity, since there was 67 years of hisotrical evidence of gross inefficiency and millions perishing under communism.


The way Bezmenov describes how the KGB's influence operations are structured is reminiscent of what Machiavelli said about how "princes" keep power:


https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1232/1232-h/1232-h.htm#link2HCH0018
	But it is necessary to know well how to disguise this characteristic, and to be a great pretender and dissembler; and men are so simple, and so subject to present necessities, that he who seeks to deceive will always find someone who will allow himself to be deceived. One recent example I cannot pass over in silence. Alexander the Sixth did nothing else but deceive men, nor ever thought of doing otherwise, and he always found victims; for there never was a man who had greater power in asserting, or who with greater oaths would affirm a thing, yet would observe it less; nevertheless his deceits always succeeded according to his wishes,(*) because he well understood this side of mankind. 

	...For this reason a prince ought to take care that he never lets anything slip from his lips that is not replete with the above-named five qualities, that he may appear to him who sees and hears him altogether merciful, faithful, humane, upright, and religious. There is nothing more necessary to appear to have than this last quality, inasmuch as men judge generally more by the eye than by the hand, because it belongs to everybody to see you, to few to come in touch with you. Every one sees what you appear to be, few really know what you are, and those few dare not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many, who have the majesty of the state to defend them; and in the actions of all men, and especially of princes, which it is not prudent to challenge, one judges by the result.

	For that reason, let a prince have the credit of conquering and holding his state, the means will always be considered honest, and he will be praised by everybody; because the vulgar are always taken by what a thing seems to be and by what comes of it; and in the world there are only the vulgar, for the few find a place there only when the many have no ground to rest on. 


"Every one sees what you appear to be, few really know what you are, and those few dare not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many"

it's a few amoral elite tricking and using idiots into grabbing them power and keeping it for them. Same thinking was outlined in Okhrana's "protocols:"


http://xroads.virginia.edu/~ma01/Kidd/thesis/pdf/protocols.pdf
	26. In all corners of the earth the words "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," brought to our ranks, thanks to our blind agents, whole legions who bore our banners with enthusiasm.

    And all the time these words were canker-worms at work boring into the well-being of the GOYIM, putting an end everywhere to peace, quiet, solidarity and destroying all the foundations of the GOYA States. As you will see later, this helped us to our triumph: it gave us the possibility, among other things, of getting into our hands the master card - the destruction of the privileges, or in other words of the very existence of the aristocracy of the GOYIM, that class which was the only defense peoples and countries had against us.

    On the ruins of the eternal and genealogical aristocracy of the GOYIM we have set up the aristocracy of our educated class headed by the aristocracy of money. The qualifications for this aristocracy we have established in wealth, which is dependent upon us, and in knowledge, for which our learned elders provide the motive force.


	...18. In order to elaborate satisfactory forms of action it is necessary to have regard to the rascality, the slackness, the instability of the mob, its lack of capacity to understand and respect the conditions of its own life, or its own welfare. It must be understood that the might of a mob is blind, senseless and unreasoning force ever at the mercy of a suggestion from any side.


	...4. Babblers, inexhaustible, have turned into oratorical contests the sittings of Parliament and Administrative Boards. Bold journalists and unscrupulous pamphleteers daily fall upon executive officials. Abuses of power will put the final touch in preparing all institutions for their overthrow and everything will fly skyward under the blows of the maddened mob.

	...	7. We appear on the scene as alleged saviours of the worker from this oppression when we propose to him to enter the ranks of our fighting forces - Socialists, Anarchists, Communists - to whom we always give support in accordance with an alleged brotherly rule (of the solidarity of all humanity) of our SOCIAL MASONRY.

	...	8. By want and the envy and hatred which it engenders we shall move the mobs and with their hands we shall wipe out all those who hinder us on our way.

	...MASSES LED BY LIES    

	4. Moreover, the art of directing masses and individuals by means of cleverly manipulated theory and verbitage, by regulations of life in common and all sorts of other quirks, in all which the GOYIM understand nothing, belongs likewise to the specialists of our administrative brain. Reared on analysis, observation, on delicacies of fine calculation, in this species of skill we have no rivals, any more than we have either in the drawing up of plans of political actions and solidarity. In this respect the Jesuits alone might have compared with us, but we have contrived to discredit them in the eyes of the unthinking mob as an overt organization, while we ourselves all the while have kept our secret organization in the shade. However, it is probably all the same to the world who is its sovereign lord, whether the head of Catholicism or our despot of the blood of Zion! But to us, the Chosen People, it is very far from being a matter of indifference.

	... 8. In all ages the people of the world, equally with individuals, have accepted words for deeds, for THEY ARE CONTENT WITH A SHOW and rarely pause to note, in the public arena, whether promises are followed by performance.