
http://www.chicagomag.com/Chicago-Magazine/October-2013/Sinaloa-Cartel/
	Why Mexico’s Sinaloa Cartel Loves Selling Drugs in Chicago

	...As for rail transport, Chicago welcomes six of the seven major railroads and accounts for a quarter of the country’s rail traffic. Water? The Port of Chicago is one of the nation’s largest inland cargo ports, and the city is the world’s third-largest handler of shipping containers (after Singapore and Hong Kong). And let’s not forget about Midway and O’Hare: More than 86 million passengers and 1.5 million tons of cargo passed through these airports combined in 2011, the latest year for which data are available.

	Second, the Chicago metro area has a large Hispanic immigrant population, making it easy for Mexican cartel operatives to blend in. (Only Los Angeles, San Antonio, and Houston have more residents of Mexican descent, according to the 2010 census.)

	Because many of these immigrants—especially those who are here illegally—are poor or underemployed, the area provides a fertile recruiting ground for cartel operatives.

	...Finally, Chicago’s deeply entrenched street gangs offer a ready-made retail network. Law enforcement officials estimate the number of street gangs in the city at more than 70 and the number of members at between 70,000 and 125,000. The DEA’s Jack Riley likens them to “100,000 Amway salesmen” for cartel-supplied drugs.

	...As one senior member of the Latin Kings puts it: “This is far more complicated than a bunch of Mexicans getting together and bringing drugs into Chicago.” He calls the link between the Flores brothers and the streets the “gray area” of the drug trade.

	It appears that no one involved in the Flores brothers’ huge narcotics ring had strong ties, if any at all, to Chicago gangs. The twins employed old friends from the neighborhood, not gang members. Antonio Aguilera, for one, was a boyhood friend of the twins’ older brother. Jorge Llamas rescued Margarito Flores from a beating when they were teenagers. Other crew members were brought in by friends or friends of friends.

	Violence is bad for business; it scares away customers. A 2000 study by University of Chicago economics professor Steven Levitt and Columbia University sociology professor Sudhir Venkatesh found that the availability of drugs and their prices fell by 20 to 30 percent during gang conflicts. Which is why the drug trade has actually unified rival gangs, or at least pushed some into an imperfect détente, says Brian Sexton, head of the narcotics unit at the Cook County state’s attorney’s office. “They’ve realized that . . . if I can sell you dope, and you can sell it, and I can keep selling you dope, and I’m making money, what do I care about Folks or Peoples?”

	...The couriers who later testified said that the twins forbade them to carry guns. Few couriers had prior convictions. Nicholas Roti, the chief of the Chicago Police Department’s Bureau of Organized Crime, says that the cartel operatives try to stay “very low key.” He adds, “This is their retail outlet; they don’t want to mess this up.”



http://tucson.com/news/local/border/cartels-recruiting-drug-people-smugglers-in-bars-high-schools/article_ab15e460-c798-54ec-a4ab-0a3f052f75ef.html
	Actually, most suspected smugglers arrested in Arizona and along the rest of the U.S.-Mexico border either are U.S. citizens or went through the yearslong process of becoming legal permanent residents.

	U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents — CBP statistics do not distinguish between the two — accounted for about two-thirds of smuggling arrests made by Tucson Sector Border Patrol agents in fiscal year 2015. Along the entire U.S.-Mexico border, citizens and legal residents accounted for 81 percent of smuggling arrests by agents.


cartels mostly recruit citizens and legal residenets

	They pick up undocumented immigrants at motel rooms or convenience-store parking lots north of the border. They wait at prearranged spots near the border or along highways for undocumented immigrants to hustle out of the brush and into their backseats or trunks.

	They then drive through Border Patrol checkpoints along Arizona highways on their way to stash houses in Tucson, Phoenix and small towns scattered throughout Southern Arizona, court records and statements made to federal judges at more than a dozen sentencing hearings show.


why do they do that?


	...Defense lawyer Jessica Turk is seeing more cases coming from Phoenix in which high school students are recruited through Facebook and told they can go to Tucson and make a few hundred bucks.

	In one case, a high school senior was arrested Sept. 8 after a Border Patrol agent pulled her over near Tombstone with an undocumented immigrant hiding under a cover in the back seat of her BMW.

	“Recruiters make it seem like a quick trip to Tucson,” Turk said.

	But when they get to Tucson, she said, they are told to go a little farther and they end up at the border.


	...Smuggling’s attraction often boils down to simply getting a paycheck.

	“It’s easy money, tax-free,” former Border Patrol chief Fisher said.


maybe cartel recruits mostly motivated by money, not getting back at racist conervatives

makes sense...

	...Defense lawyer Turk sees a deeper pattern among her clients, many of whom live in economically depressed areas of Arizona: women who were sexually abused as children and men whose fathers were absent due to being incarcerated, often on smuggling charges.


people poor, abent fathers, sexually abused, downtrodden

	“It’s like an equation,” Turk said. “You put in these factors and you get these results.”

	The lawyer for a woman who suffers from mental illness wrote in a memo to the court that her client’s life “reads like a Dickensian novel” and the abuse she suffered at the hands of her family was a “Petri dish for mental illness and despair.”


then on top of that donald Trump comes off his golden toilet and tells you your a problem to be solved while everyone claps--could see that pushing some over the edge



...


http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/11/02/AR2009110203492.html
	"It was bullets that killed him, because he was shot in the face and the head," said his mother, Dionisia Villalobos. "But he had little pieces from the grenades all over his body."

	More than the violence, U.S. and Mexican officials and youth advocates said they fear that the rampant criminality is producing a generation that venerates cartel barons and views trafficking as a form of rebellion -- as well as an escape from poverty.

	"What struck me most in the short time that I was in Juarez was not the threat of violence," said Carlos Pascual, the new U.S. ambassador to Mexico. "It was the threat of what occurs if you lose a whole generation."

	To counter the lure of the cartels, the U.S. State Department last month organized a meeting of international youth groups in Mexico City to encourage the use of social networks to oppose violence. The co-founder of Twitter, Jack Dorsey, was mobbed by students asking for advice on how to build online communities to distribute positive messages and counter the cartels' propaganda.

	In Culiacan, a city in the western state of Sinaloa where many of Mexico's most notorious traffickers grew up, teenagers view the drug bosses as "heroes," said an 18-year-old woman who asked not to be identified. She said teenagers talk openly about the thrill of smuggling, work that can earn them about $500 a trip. 

	"Everyone around here talks about it, especially the kids," she said in an interview. "It's like -- I'm not sure how to describe it -- but they look at it like the ultimate wow." 


	... According to Mexican authorities, La Familia, a cartel based in the southwestern state of Michoacan, recruits members as young as 14. The organization inculcates the youngsters with a radical religious doctrine that demands loyalty, a promise to respect women and children -- and a commitment to kill rivals.

	The young gangsters emerge from a grim panorama marked by an absence of government authority. Calderón's wife, Margarita Zavala, said in October that 60 percent of Mexico's children live in poverty.

	"In some parts of this country, it would appear that the only options for children are to immigrate to the United States or become traffickers," said Teresa Almada, director of the Center for the Assistance and Promotion of Children in Juarez.

	In Juarez, where low-wage assembly plants called "maquiladoras" have been mothballed because of the recession, a third of all teenagers neither work nor attend school, according to census figures.

	"These days, youths are joining the drug cartels at an ever-younger age because they're cheap," said Martin Barron Cruz, a researcher at the National Institute of Criminal Science in Mexico. "It is a question of the market. A kid of 15 ends up doing the same job as a 20-year-old, but for half the money."

	"It is easier for the cartels to dispose of them when they are no longer needed," Barron said. "I say 'dispose' because, sadly, there's no other word for it. They eliminate them, often using another kid of the same age."

	Prisoners are also getting younger, Barron said. The largest cohort of inmates is now 19 to 25 years old. 



------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aryan_Brotherhood
	The Aryan Brotherhood, also known as the Brand, or the AB, is a white supremacist and Neo-Nazi prison gang and organized crime syndicate in the United States with an estimated 15,000–20,000 members in and out of prison. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, although the Brotherhood makes up only a tiny percentage of the U.S. prison population, it is responsible for a highly disproportionate number of prison murders.

	The gang has focused on the economic activities typical of organized crime entities, particularly drug trafficking, extortion, inmate prostitution, and murder-for-hire.

	...In 1992, the Brotherhood established ties with American Mafia crime, via boss John Gotti, who was sentenced to prison and contacted the Brotherhood for protection while he was in prison. Gotti also organized a business partnership on the outside between his group and the Brotherhood on the outside, which greatly expanded the group's power on the streets.[34]

	Their communication and control has become so tight and efficient, that they have been able to organize and direct major criminal enterprises on the outside, even from solitary confinement, much to the frustration of federal and state authorities.[34]

	The group has an alliance[40] with La Eme (the Mexican Mafia) as the two are mutual enemies of Black Guerrilla Family.


http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/explainer/2009/05/the_six_flavors_of_white_supremacy.html


racism as a way to get people into organized crime?

Aryan brotherhood thinks they have to "defend themselves" from gangs associated with other races

and presumably to raise money to "defend themselves," would have to sell a little meth on the side...

all for the cause, right?


...


http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199766031.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199766031-e-019
	How immigration and ethnicity shaped delinquent youth groups (gangs) and adult organized crime syndicates (mobs) is examined. Ethnicity has played a key role in these organizations. Gangs and mobs used ethnic ties as an organizing principle to foster trust in their illicit activities. Scholars have usually applied the theory of ethnic succession to account for the changes in supremacy over the informal economy. Yet scholars have attached too much importance to the ethnic succession theory. To fully understand the underworld, scholars need to recognize interethnic cooperation, the persistence of class, and the rewards of whiteness.



...


https://www.muckrock.com/news/archives/2017/jul/21/fbi-soviet-recruitment/
	The pamphlet also lists several motives and techniques Russian and other Soviet operatives would use in their attempts to recruit someone: greed, blackmail, national pride, exploitation of emotions, “false flags”, ideology, naivete, and revenge


	...Appeals to national pride were typically “aimed at emigrants” from Eastern European and Soviet Bloc countries.

	...The “false flag” approach would see the target approached from someone claiming to be associated with an American ally or other group which the individual would want to help.

	...Ideological beliefs were also particularly exploited, though the focus had changed over the years. In the ’50s and ’60s, ideological approaches largely focused on those with “communist sympathies.” A more modern approach would be based on someone’s other views, such as a “desire for international harmony and world peace” or nuclear disarmament. Other ideological beliefs, such as a deep seated opposition to CIA or views on NATO, could similarly be used.

	...The final motive explored by the pamphlet was a desire for revenge, a self-explanatory and relatively easy to manipulate motive. It was, after all, “a quick way to wreak vengeance” while profiting off the bargain. “Needless to say, if an intelligence officer divines that a targeted American is dissatisfied … the spy will zero in on this discontent.”


the more reasons to hate the country you live in, the more ways to recruit!


	...The solution to all of this, however, remained simple - avoid these meetings to begin with, and if they occur report them immediately to a security officer or to the FBI. The worst thing that someone could do would be to try to handle it on their own. The Bureau warned that “any attempts by untrained or uninformed persons to handle hostile efforts on their own could result not only in personal disaster, but may also interfere with the FBI’s counterintelligence effort.” Nor was there any need for someone to go it alone - for anyone in the United States, “the FBI is as close as your nearest telephone.”


if only


...


http://www.policemag.com/blog/gangs/story/2011/10/raza-racist-and-other-radicals.aspx
	The Hidden Agendas of Latino Activists
	Latino activist groups such as MEChA bring a racist agenda to the table of political power.

	...Reminisant of the anti-Vietnam demonstrations of the past, today carefully orchestrated protests and marches are taking place all over the United States. Crowds of expatriated Latinos (legal and illegal) and their supporters mug for the media carrying signs that insult the rule of law and the will of the American people. They carry foreign flags and sometimes burn the U.S. flag in protest. These organized marches are designed to make it appear to the gullible that the majority of the citizens of the U.S. support open borders and immigration amnesty. This is a lie.


something off with this article

	Who's pulling the strings on this big puppet show? Surprisingly, some of these puppeteers are from prominent mainstream organizations such as the National Council de La Raza that are funded by millions of taxpayer dollars and federal grants. The Spanish "La Raza" translates literally to "The Race." National Council de La Raza uses these funds to run charter schools and get-out-the-vote efforts to support their political agenda.  


"La Raza" used as a prop in Russian propaganda a lot--why? (maybe it's the name...)

maybe this article an example of propaganda targetting U.S. police



http://www.chicanxdeaztlan.org/
	MEChA de U of U has been saddened and angered by the recent political discourses and the surge of racist, anti-queer, sexist, xenophobic, islamophobic violence, both physical and emotional. We are truly inspired by the tenacity that our communities have demonstrated by continuing to fight back. We hope to celebrate and affirm our community’s resilience by sharing space, connecting, dialoguing, and collectively healing. We hope that the conference provides a space to think critically and explore issues of power, history, self-identity, and how we can decolonize the toxicity we have learned to normalize in order to take action and rebuild our communities.


I guess Trump and internet research agency propaganda would increase recuirting into these--but for what?


http://www.policemag.com/blog/gangs/story/2011/10/raza-racist-and-other-radicals.aspx
	...Cal State Northridge MEChA member Miguel Perez is quoted as saying, "The ultimate ideology is the liberation of Aztlan. Communism would be closest [to it]. Once Aztlan is established, ethnic cleansing would commence—non-Chicanos would have to be expelled—opposition groups would be quashed because you have to keep power."


maybe that? if "police magazine" can be trusted

I guess its easier to influence people if they join a secret society or some kind of club, whatever the society is.


http://www.chicanxdeaztlan.org/p/about-us.html
	What is Aztlán?
    
    Aztlán was the homeland of the Mexica (pronounced me-SHI- ka). Geographically it is the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico. Today we understand Aztlán not as a defined territory. Instead, it is an idea that unifies all Raza as a sacred place of origin, to which Raza espouse a physical connection. Aztlán is the common homeland and is the place of the collective experience and social praxis.


that's kindof weird


another pan-[insert ethnicity here]-ism?