https://books.google.com/books?id=YWUxDKN80BgC&pg=PA336
    Russian fascism's main home was outside Europe, in Manchuria. The Russian Fascist Party, modelled on Mussolini's movement, was founded in the city of Harbin in 1931. Here, on the remote reaches of the Sungary river, thousands of Russians who had fled from the revolution constructed a little Russia. In a city teeming with different nationalities, the Russians printed and read numerous papers in Russian, attended the Russian cathedral, sat in cafes along the smart Bolshoi Prospekt, and talked endlessly of the war of revenge against Bolshevism. The White community was fractions and diverse, and Soviet agents encouraged their squabbles.


------


https://archive.org/stream/YuriBezmenovBlackIsBeautifulCommunismIsNot/YuriBezmenovBlackIsBeautiful_djvu.txt
	The principle of subversion was formu- lated by a Chinese philosopher 2,500 years ago. Sun Tzu said, ' 'All warfare is based primarily on deception of your enemy. To fight on the battlefield to achieve your goals is the most primitive and barbaric to achieve your goals. The highest art of war is not to fight at all, but to subvert anything of value in your enemy's country." Which includes relig- ion, moral principles, traditions, and nat- ural established relationships between people, families, groups, classes, races. Turn the blacks against the whites; turn the teachers against students; turn Ralph Nader against the government; labor un- ions against business; homosexuals against heterosexuals; and keep on fight- ing, my dear friends, until you demoralize and destabilize yourself and then you flop like a rotten apple and the enemy will take you over. You will invite the enemy. 


bezmenov decided active measures goal was to divide people after working at RIA novosti, but didn't think KGB had "thousands of agents" in the West since they would defect.

	...Discontented people produce less. Low- er productivity creates economic instabil- ity and social unrest. This leads to radical- ism because people become impatient. That leads to power struggles. Power struggles lead to replacement of social, political structure. That replacement is the fastest way to internal upheaval, civil war, or invasion. The result for the last observ- able 35 years is always the same — closed society. Just the opposite of what we started with. Everything is nationalized, from banks to washrooms. Human beings belong to the state.


I think he's talking about what he saw in the cold war?


	...Your media lies to you. Why? Media is a part of the process of demoralization. They are monopolized today. They are controlled by the same group of people, unelected, super-rich and super-powerful people who trade with murders of my na- tion in the Kremlin. Interesting isn't it? With one hand these people send your boys to Vietnam for 12 years. With the other hand they send billions of dollars of credit to the Soviet government to build weapons to kill your boys in Vietnam. Imagine, when people make a mistake once and repeat this mistake — repeats the same mis- take three times, we call him a dangerous idiot. What would you call people in your establishment who repeat the same mis- take, aiding your enemy and the enemy of my people in the Kremlin, over and over again for 68 years? Traitors. And they control your media.




https://archive.org/details/BezmenovWorldThoughtPolice1986