

https://www.justsecurity.org/44289/sonic-attacks-diplomats-cuba-dont-rush-conclusions/


John Sipher, former CIA leaderhsip guy, says cuba attacks probably just malfunctioning survelliance equipment


	...There has been no shortage of theories as to the reasons for the attacks, some speculating that it was payback against specific individuals, a possible operation by third parties (the Russians?) to drive a wedge between the U.S. and Cuba,

	...Why don’t I believe this was an attack intended to harm diplomats?

	First, I don’t think the timing or diplomatic atmosphere accords with such hostile action by the Cuban government.  U.S. and Canadian diplomats reported their symptoms in the fall of 2016.  At that time, the Obama Administration had relaxed diplomatic relations with Cuba


a lapse in reasoning for Sipher? says in same article could be third party stirring shit, then cites as reason to not believe intended to harm diplomats since "diplomatic atmosphere" between Cuba and U.S. friendly at that time.

In most of his other writings, Sipher disposed to blame Russia for everything:


https://twitter.com/john_sipher/status/971003146570027008
	John Sipher
	‏Verified account @john_sipher
	Mar 6

	How can one not be a Russophobe? Russia soft power is political warfare. Hard power is invading neighbors, hiding the death of civilians with chemical weapons and threatening with doomsday nuclear weapons. And they kill the opposition at home. Name something positive.


why not here, when it's an obvious answer to the quandry he brings up?


	...Finally, and more significantly, we have seen too many similar technical “attacks” around the world which caused unintended harm. These efforts, while designed to further surveillance and eavesdropping and not to cause malicious damage, nevertheless risked or resulted in residual physical harm to U.S. diplomats.


	...The Russian security services were also known to flood the U.S. embassy in Moscow with electromagnetic radiation.  They would beam concentrated microwaves and electronic pulses at the Embassy in an attempt to eavesdrop on U.S. typewriters and conversations.  In the 1970s, a U.S. Ambassador contracted and died of a blood disease that many assumed to be a result of the attacks.  The State Department detected high levels of radiation in the embassy staff, and provided hazard pay to personnel who worked in Moscow. 


his other reason is there are "too many" instances of surveillance activities accidently hurting people, and cites microwave attacks on Moscow embassy as an example.


	...Given this historical practice, I suspect what happened in Havana was unfortunate but probably a collection/counterintelligence attack gone wrong rather than a directed attack intended to hurt diplomats. As Senator Rubio correctly pointed out, the Cuban government has long harassed U.S. representatives, and engaged in intrusive tracking of our representatives in Havana. However, we have never seen them try to do serious harm to our diplomats perhaps for fear that we could do the same).  Deployment of a weapon across these different times and locations by a third party is possible but highly unlikely without the direct assistance of the Cuban government.


funny considering it's happening in the U.S. too...


Sipher doesn't really have an argument.

Why write this?



------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/election-meddling-u-s-intelligence-2
	At the risk of acting exactly as Russia would like, we’ll indulge the whataboutism crowd for a moment. We openly admit the CIA is an espionage enterprise, and a major component of that, as the CIA says in its mission statement, is to conduct “effective covert action as directed by the President.”

	...Covert action is similar to what Russian intelligence services call “active measures.”

	The president must approve every covert action through a “Presidential Finding,” and the intelligence oversight committees in Congress monitor the action.

	...The key point, however, is that our society processes its blunders and takes the consequences seriously. Our covert action does not take place in a vacuum, but within a structured set of rules and laws.

	...So how is Russia’s influence operation against our election different?

	Russia’s influence operation is an attempt by an authoritarian regime, led by a single individual with zero oversight and who is not accountable in any way


John Sipher tries to argue CIA doing active measures is OK because Congress signs off on it


seems like this article would be efficient for convincing people to continue to do bad things

if CIA officer reads it and believes it: "oh, I guess this is ok since Congress signed off on it and people voted for them"

if KGB officer reads it "CIA is full of shit and has no basis to call me out for doing what I'm doing"


a better argument against whataboutism:

> CIA blows up oil pipeline in Russia for no reason

> KGB pissed and blows up another oil pipline near my house

> be burned and horribly disfigured

> "please stop burning off my skin I need that"

> "EXCUSE ME BUT CIA DOES IT TO"


I guess its like KGB and CIA see each other as representatives of each others countries, and everyone else as peons to blow up along the way of fighting. So people like Sipher apparently get them fighting while the rest of the world suffers.

A better approach would be to go after the CIA officers who authorized such an attack and bring them to justice. Which, curiously, would at one point have included Mr. Sipher...




------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/u-s-russian-cooperation-on-isis-do-we-want-our-face-ripped-off-again

	...Following some initial sharing of knowledge, further efforts to work with the Russians ended up focused almost solely on their internal battle with Chechen separatists and provided little in return that helped the U.S global effort. Those in CIA engaged with the Russians on the counterterrorism front joked that they were missing the “Global War on Terror,” while they fought Russia’s “Global War on Chechen Terror.” 

	...However, as we look forward to a better relationship with Russia, it should be with open eyes. Do we need something of theirs that we don’t have? What are we willing to give up to get it?

	...Ultimately, working together on anything of value takes trust. Even if we have a shared enemy, it is hard to see how the U.S. can work effectively with a country bent on destroying the U.S.-led world order.


against cooperation with Russia and comes off as a dick about it

says even if killing terrorists not worth it unless U.S. gets something out of it

this was written in June 28, 2017... you'd think Sipher would realize that fighting Chechan terrorists would involve opposing FSB agents and remove FSB capabilities that could be used to create pretext to invade Chechnya

so even if all he cares about is fighting Russia or FSB, what he's saying doesn't make sense


------

https://www.thecipherbrief.com/comey-firing-a-big-deal-cipher-brief-expert-tells-cnbc
	John Sipher, a former member of the CIA’s senior intelligence service, appeared on CNBC’s “Squawk Box” Wednesday morning to discuss U.S. President Donald Trump’s sudden firing of FBI Director James Comey.

	“The timing is a bit fishy because there really is nothing new here, right? The information that they are looking at on Director Comey is from last summer and leading up to the new administration,” Sipher said.


timing was after a Congressional hearing on that subject where Comey did poorly, Trump even said that in an interview. Not as suspicious as Sipher makes it out to be.


------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/the-russian-b-team
	Likewise, if the material presented in former British MI-6 officer Christopher Steele’s report on Russian efforts to influence the Trump team is to be believed, it would also make sense in this framework. That is, seeing Trump and his associates as low-level targets at the time, second string operatives were tasked to follow and document their activities. Thus, it was not that hard for Steele and others to uncover the Russians’ clumsy schemes. Again, the efforts to engage the Trump team were probably not a top priority until he started to win, and by that time, it was too late to clean up the mess.


didn't the Steele dossier say the Russian gov tried to cultivate Trump for years?


	...However, while the result has been a massive short-term win for the Russian intelligence services and Russian President Vladimir Putin, I am not certain that the Russians really thought through the ramifications of the attack, nor will it likely serve Russia’s strategic interests over the long term.  


	...Nonetheless, I suspect the people who will suffer the most from this episode will be the Russians themselves. 

	While Putin appears powerful at present, Russia’s meddling and dirty tricks undercuts their credibility and make it more difficult for them to repair their anemic economy and re-integrate globally. Trust and credibility are the basis of fruitful relations between countries. How can anyone trust a country that so blatantly and aggressively seeks to undermine others? Who will partner with a country that harbors fugitives, attacks democratic elections, spreads untruths, supports criminal regimes, oppresses its citizens, and invades neighbors? 

	Russia has made long-term enemies of numerous countries, and there will certainly be blowback from their attacks. Even on the tactical side, Putin’s blatant use of WikiLeaks as an enabler will make it a less reliable place to “launder” the Kremlin’s propaganda in the future. Last, but not least, the continuing fallout generated from this episode will make it politically difficult for President Trump to deliver on his promise to improve cooperation with the Russians. If the Kremlin hoped to gain a sympathetic and acquiescent friend in the White House, they may have blown their opportunity. 

	It is hard to envision any winners emerging from the Russian active measure operations.


has some truth to it

if Sipher gets that, what does that say about him? the motives of him and his associates?



------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/the-ic-is-not-a-murky-cabal-pulling-the-strings-in-washington
	The IC Is Not a Murky Cabal Pulling the Strings in Washington
	March 15, 2017 | John Sipher

	...Even if they had the means to collude, it is not clear to me why anyone would assume that they have a liberal agenda.



http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/01/07/AR2008010702822.html
	Communists at the OSS

	In his Dec. 24 column, "Subverting Bush at Langley," Robert D. Novak included a swipe at the Office of Strategic Services, the World War II predecessor of the CIA. Mr. Novak wrote that the OSS "was infiltrated by communists."

	The Soviet Union was our ally during World War II. The OSS was not infiltrated by communists during the war; it hired them. They helped to identify native recruits to infiltrate enemy forces and organizations. OSS founder William Donovan reportedly said that he would "put Stalin on the OSS payroll if it would help defeat Hitler." 


http://humanevents.com/2007/07/23/yes-oss-was-riddled-with-communists/
	Yes, OSS Was Riddled With Communists

	...“I hope there’s something in here about Duncan Lee,” I said.

	“No,” replied Griffin, “It’s about ‘Wild Bill’ Donovan,” referring to Maj. Gen. William Joseph Donovan, founder and head of the OSS.

	“You know,” I ventured, “Donovan’s assistant, Duncan Lee, actually was a double agent for the Soviet Union.”

	“‘Wild Bill’ Donovan’s assistant was a Soviet agent?” asked Griffin slowly, cocking an eyebrow at me in total disbelief. “Now that’s a story I can’t believe.”  Next, he clearly figured, I’d be telling him black helicopter tales. 

	...How could such a credentialed expert be so ill-informed about the most highly placed double agent the Soviets had in the OSS? Beats me, but the evidence against Lee is overwhelming. Moreover, the OSS was riddled with other important Communists, as now available FBI files, congressional investigations and the Venona intercepts of Communist cable traffic to Moscow make abundantly clear.

	Lt. Col. Duncan Chaplin Lee was confidential assistant to Gen. Donovan from 1942-46. While serving in that capacity, according to Soviet courier Elizabeth Bentley, Lee furnished her with information on “anti-Soviet work by OSS” and other topics of interest to Moscow. As Bentley told the FBI when she defected in 1945, she transferred this information to her Soviet handlers. 

	...The sad truth, however, is that Lee was just one of many identified Soviet agents in the OSS. Others, as we now know from numerous impeccable sources, included Maurice Halperin, Carl Marzani, Franz Neumann, Helen Tenney, Julius and Bella Joseph and Lee’s Oxford classmate, Donald Niven Wheeler.


https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA328&lpg=PA328
	The dozen identified sources discussed in this chapter do not exhaust the KGB's assets in the OSS; others mentioned in various documents have unidentified code names. ...In a deciphered cable discussing the Russian section of the OSS sent on May 1942, Vasily Zarubin noted that Scott, an OSS analyst on Soviet industry, was "our source Ivanov." David Wahl (discussed in chapter 4) was a longtime GRU agent but shifted to the KGB in early 1945, and he was employed by the OSS late in World War II.

	...None of these sources served a day in prison for espionage, although Halperin became a refugee and Foster a fugitive. Stanley Graze was indicted but for purely commercial criminal behavior. Several others were pilloried before comgressional committees and lost their government jobs, but only Duncan Lee and Helen Tenney appeared to pay an emotional price for their activities.


https://opengeography.wordpress.com/2013/08/28/venona-decrypts-and-soviet-penetration-of-the-oss/
	Bentley went to the FBI in August 1945 and revealed that the OSS was penetrated by Soviet agents. (This was not a new accusation; during the latter days of the OSS a number of newspaper articles by Walter Trohan accused the OSS of this and of being an internal police organization or “Gestapo.” The source of Trohan’s material was long thought to be J. Edgar Hoover who had no desire to see a post-war OSS, but Thomas F. Troy, the CIA historian has made the case it was Harry Hopkins–Roosevelt’s closest advisor! Additionally, the “Park Report” which was delivered to President Truman the day after Roosevelt’s death, accused the OSS of lax security and used overlapping language to the Trohan pieces.) Many did not believe Bentley, but the Venona/Vassiliev materials have shown that those OSS people she named were indeed Soviet agents.

	In particular, Bentley identified the following OSS personnel:

		Helen B. Tenney
		Codename: "Muse"
		[misspelled as "Tenny" in NARA OSS personnel database]
		OSS R&A Iberian branch

		Joseph J. Julius
		Codename: "Ostorozhnyj" ["Cautious"]
		OSS R&A, Far East Division, Civilian Economics

		Donald Wheeler
		Codename: "Izra"
		OSS Editorial Board, R&A

		Maurice Halperin
		Codename: "Zayats" ["Hare"] and "Stowaway"
		OSS R&A, Chief, Latin American Division

		Duncan C. Lee
		Codename: "Koch"
		OSS Executive Assistant to Director Donovan

	Two things are notable from this list. First it was the OSS Research and Analysis (R&A) branch that largely housed the Soviet moles, and second in the case of Lee they managed to penetrate quite high into the organization.


https://books.google.com/books?id=Zf2hmyQ8mlcC&pg=PA62&lpg=PA62
	After briefing Roosevelt in August, Donovan had delivered a wide radio address over the Mutual Broadcasting System warning the United States had better prepare militarily or face the scary prospect of joining "the nations of Europe that have fallen." With Mowrer he penned a wildly exaggerated series of articles warning that a $200-million-a-year German propaganda and sabotage program worldwide, which had undermined the will of conquered countries like France to resist, now had hundreds of thousands of hostile agents or Nazi sympathizers inside the United States. There was no evidence that this was the case, but FDR believed it and had ordered J. Edgar Hoover to ruthlessly investigate Nazi, fascist and communist subversion in the country.


goes on to detail interactions between Donovan and Churchill.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_J._Donovan

Donovan mostly a politician and lawyer at first, got cozy with FDR and Churchill



https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2009/07/17/declassified-documents-reveal-kgb-spies-in-the-us
	Declassified Documents Reveal KGB Spies in the U.S.

	...There were journalists, too, like Walter Lippmann, I. F. Stone, and Bernard Redmont, a former correspondent for U.S. News who has been denying spying allegations for more than a half century.


http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/viewFile/6881/2138
	First, this article examines Lippmann’s contribution to the activities of the Committee for National Morale. Second, the article focuses on the relationship  between  Lippmann  and  William  “Wild  Bill”  Donovan,  the  director  of  the  Office of the Coordinator of Information and the Office of Strategic Services. Third, the article turns to the relationship between Lippmann and Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy, and explores Lippmann’s role in the War Department’s Psychological Warfare Branch. 

	... During the war, propaganda and psychological warfare operations were organized through a network of loosely connected civil and military governmental agencies, civil society groups, and university-based research institutes. My research shows that Lippmann played a pivotal role in this network. He was not only involved, at the highest levels, in the planning of the network’s main organizations, but also he was one of the key nodes connecting its different parts. Lippmann’s newspaper column in that period reflected this involvement on several occasions, as he seized the opportunity to promote and articulate part of the network’s agenda. In this sense, Lippmann’s role was also to present propaganda and psychological warfare to the public.

	...During the Second World War, one of the first steps toward the establishment of the propaganda and psychological warfare network was the creation of the Committee for National Morale in July 1940. Affiliated with the Council for Democr acy, this civilian committee was foun ded “to work out a plan of action for an American morale service to turn back the German psychological attack.” ...Roosevelt then established the Office of the Coordinator of Information (COI; July 1941) and the Office of Facts and Figures (OFF; October 1941).

	Colonel Donovan’s COI was supposed to perform intelligence collection and foreign propaganda work. In fact, its operations and aims were largely determined by Donovan, whose idea of psychological warfare was “to beat the Germans at their own game” (Laurie, 1996, p. 79). The agency was soon staffed by a mix of journalists, academics, and military men, and was fully operational by December 1941. ... the OFF was mostly considered a propaganda agency by American citizens, and the press launched numerous attacks on it (Rogers, 1994). 

	In June 1942, with the United States now officially at war, Roosevelt ordered a major reorganization of the two offices. Donovan’s COI became the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), a paramilitary organization primarily devoted to covert psychological warfare and intelligence operations in foreign countries.


	...According to Arthur Upham Pope, Chairman of the Committee for National Morale, Lippmann had been “sympathetic and helpful” during the summer of 1940, when the committee was getting started.6 Not only did Lippmann regularly exchange views with the founding members of the committee, but he also used his column to promote its agenda on multiple occasions.

	On July 25, 1940, Thomas W. Huntington, who was to serve as secretary of the committee, sent Lippmann a copy of a letter to the editor he contributed to TheNew York Times earlier that month. Huntington’s letter, titled “Attack on Nerves—the ‘Secret Weapon’ Held to be Mental Breakdown,” described how “since 1918, German scientific research has been at work perfecting what it has today produced—a mechanism capable of converting human beings into masses of purposeless flesh, incapable of resistance in the face of an advancing military force.”7 Huntington argued that radio, newspapers, and cinematographs were central to this “nerves war” as they significantly contributed to “the disorientation of the opinions and emotional attitudes of the great mass of the civil population.” Huntington wrote,

		The purpose of this letter is to appeal to the leaders of American science to create among themselves a functioning unit, constituted at first of only five to ten specialists in human psychology, publicity, an allied problem, under the aegis of one or more of our leading American universities or scientific institutions or society.8

	The group was supposed “to plan quickly for an adequately comprehensive further study of the strategy of this new war of words and nerves, leading to the formulation and recommendation of adequate lines of defense, national in scope.”

	With the letter to the editor, Huntington enclosed a note inviting Lippmann to “contribute as the organization of plans progresses further.” Lippmann replied that “the best way to get anything done is to take it up with a few American scientists and create the nucleus of the necessary organization, and then, outside laymen journalists will have something to support.”9 Lippmann also exchanged views with the committee’s chairman, Arthur Upham Pope, whom he had known since the First World War, during which they were both at the War Department.10 In August 1940, Pope, sent to Lippmann “a preliminary program to show just roughly what a morale commission can and ought to do.”11 Lippmann replied that he was “very much interested” in the program and that Pope “couldn’t have a better group of men for this work, nor could a more important piece of work be undertaken.”12 In a subsequent letter, Pope sent to Lippmann a memo highlighting what the group was driving at, and wrote that he could be “of greatest assistance, at this juncture—or any other juncture.”13 When the committee finally began its activities, Pope regularly wrote to Lippmann to set up meetings or send him the committee’s publications, including its first, *German Psychological Warfare.*


Lippman tight with Donovan, both putting out idea that Germans responsible for active measures in U.S.

article also details weird things Lippman said

	...The Curious Relationship of Walter Lippmann and Wild Bill Donovan During the summer of 1941, when Donovan’s Office of the Coordinator of Information was set up, Lippmann played an important role in defining the agency’s mission and helped to recruit some of its top executives and most prominent scholars. His role in the COI can be traced back to his privileged yet enigmatic relationship with Colonel William Donovan. When Lippmann and Donovan first met remains unclear, but they had probably known each other since the early 1920s when Lippmann’s career was taking off and Donovan was an influential New York lawyer and politician.

	In April 1938, shortly before the outbreak of war, Lippmann began renting Donovan’s house in Georgetown. “It is one of the pleasantest houses to live in that I have ever known,” an enthusiastic Lippmann wrote to Donovan.19 But at the end of May, Lippmann and his wife set off to Europe for the summer, and upon their return in September, they moved out of Donovan’s house.20 At that time, Donovan was about to begin a series of trips to Europe at the special request of President Roosevelt himself. His mission was to build a global intelligence network.

	When Donovan was appointed director of the COI, Lippmann provided him with a list of men he thought suitable to fill the top executive positions of the new agency.


Yikes


	A last significant episode that sheds light on the Lippmann and Donovan’s relationship occurred a few years later, at the beginning of the Cold War. In May 1948, CBS journalist George Polk was mysteriously murdered while covering the Greek Civil War. Lippmann, who knew Polk and had recommended his application for a Nieman Fellowship, was soon appointed head of a committee of media representatives—which became known as the “Lippmann Committee”—responsible for monitoring the Greeks’ investigation of the murder and for preventing any form of cover-up. As surprising as it may sound, Lippmann appointed his good old friend Bill Donovan as the committee’s special advisor. At the time, Donovan was very much involved in the newly formed CIA, which he regarded as his own child (Marton, 1990, p. 202). 


https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/kent-csi/vol37no3/html/v37i3a09p_0001.htm
	Planning for a CIA

	...Donovan sent a copy of the memorandum to lsador Lubin, an assistant to the President and a strong supporter of OSS. Lubin showed it to the President, who, on 31 October 1944, formally invited Donovan to consider postwar intelligence needs and organization.

	Doering's memorandum was then circulated to all interested parties. The continuation of a central intelligence agency in peacetime gained some support from civilian agencies but little from the military. Nevertheless, the idea survived.

	...In January 1945, at a meeting involving Donovan, Allen Dulles, and Robert D. Murphy, US political adviser to General Eisenhower, it was agreed that espionage should not be limited to the American zone but that it also should be conducted in the British, French, and Russian sectors. Donovan had become increasingly suspicious of Russian intentions to cooperate with the West in postwar policies and programs. So when a German intelligence officer on the Eastern Front, Gen. Reinhardt Gehlen, fled to the Alps to surrender to Americans with his files and his group, he was taken to OSS headquarters. The Gehlen organization was debriefed, and it was allowed to continue operating its network in Russia.

	...London remained a major base for OSS, containing the largest number of personnel outside the United States. ...Donovan met with branch chiefs and reviewed these operations, especially the efforts to supply the Resistance forces in northern Norway. The British had not cooperated fully in this activity, refusing to allocate RAF aircraft manned by Norwegian pilots. In late March the use of American aircraft with inexperienced pilots had resulted in a disastrous drop in Norway of a group headed by Lt. William Colby, years later Director of Central Intelligence. Two planes crashed, men were killed, and many supplies were dropped irretrievably off target.

	...OSS was again the object of a calculated series of press attacks, chiefly in articles by Walter Trohan, a reporter considered to be close to J. Edgar Hoover. These appeared at a time when the House Appropriations Committee was considering the OSS budget request for the coming year. The articles accused OSS and the War Department of harboring Communists, requiring Donovan and General Bissel, G-2, to go to the capital to defend their personnel.


https://books.google.com/books?id=MBHSY0bCFWoC&pg=PA278&lpg=PA278
	While the OSS was operational, however, Donovan steadfastly denied that he ever recruited Communists. In 1945 a congressional committee, concerned about Communists holding military commissions, asked Donovan about four OSS officers it had identified as probably Communists. These four were Milton Wolff, Vincent Lossowski, Irving Fajans, and Irving Goff, all Lincoln Brigade veterans then serving with the OSS in Italy. Donovan praised their OSS records, saying, "These men I've been in the slit trenches with and have been in the muck with, and I have seen what they have done and I would measure them up against any man in their loyalty." If Donovan had left it at that, his remarks would have been simply a commendable defense of soldiers who were then serving the nation well regardless of their politics. General Donovan went on to testify, however, that he had investigated all four and "did not find that they were Communists. I found that they were not." Donovan was also asked if any of the four had been in the Young Communist League. Donovan testified that "they were not." In fact, two of the four, Wolff and Fajans, had been open members of the Young Communist League in the 1930s.

	Donovan assured the Congress that everyone in the OSS had been thoroughly investigated: "I try to determine whether a man is or is not a Fascist or a Communist--I have never taken a man of whom I had any doubt." One congressman asked if perhaps because of special qualifications needed for some types of OSS work Donovan had recruited someone with those special qualifications even though "he had been a member of the Communist Party . . . or a contributor to . . . some Communistic magazine." Donovan, refusing the opportunity to gain some wiggle room, replied unequivocally, "I should say right here no such case has ever happened."

	There was no doubt that Donovan deceived Congress when he denied knowledge of the Communist links of Milton Wolff and other OSS personnel or that, given his negotiations with Dennis, he concealed from Congress the extent of OSS dealings with the CPUSA. If a senior intelligence official were to so mislead a congressional committee today, the deception would be regarded as worthy of a criminal charge.

	...Donovan sent all four OSS officers letter of praise of their work, promoted Goff to captain, and awarded him the Legion of Merit. After the war, Goff became a full-time organizer for the CPUSA, serving as head of the Louisiana Communist party and as an official in the New York party.

	...Elizabeth Bentley, the former Soviet spy, said several Communists in the OSS had furnished her with information, and she described the infiltration of a Communist into Rockefeller's Inter-American Coordinator's Office.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_J._Donovan#CIA
	Meanwhile, Truman moved forward with plans for a new intelligence agency, finally giving approval in 1946 for a watered-down interdepartmental "Central Intelligence Group." Donovan warned that it would be ineffectual – he compared it to a "debating society" – and he soon proved to be right. As the Cold War quickly intensified, Truman recognized the need for a far stronger intelligence service, and in February 1947 asked Congress to approve plans for a Central Intelligence Agency along the lines Donovan had proposed.[83] Donovan himself lobbied Congress privately to pass the enabling legislation, the National Security Act of 1947.[74] It was, in the words of Waller, "a vindication of Donovan's vision".[84] Among the OSS members who went on to become major CIA figures were Allen Dulles, William Casey, William Colby, and James Jesus Angleton.[45]

	Donovan wanted to lead the CIA, and had many supporters who urged Truman to put him in charge. Instead, the president gave the job to Admiral Roscoe Hillenkoetter, whom Waller described as "lackluster". Meanwhile, Donovan accepted a Truman appointment to head a committee studying the country's fire departments. But he worked behind the scenes to aid in the formation of the CIA, recommending that Hillenkoetter hire Dulles and other OSS veterans


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP88-01350R000200460006-8.pdf
	Confidential Intelligence Report

	...At the time the C.I.A. was established in 1947 its purposes, as set forth under the National Security Act, were to coordinate the intelligence activities of the several government departments and agencies ...It's predecessor, the O.S.S., created during World War II, had been heavily infiltrated with Communists, Communist sympathizers and radicals. Among its members were Carl Aldo Marzani, later identified as a Communist; Robert T. Miller, III, who was a contact of Soviet courier Elizabeth Bentley; Leonard E. Mins, who refused to deny being a Soviet agent when he was on the witness stand; Philip Keeney, who took the Fifth Amendment concerning his Communist activities; Donald Wheeler, identified by Elizabeth Bentley as being engaged in Soviet espionage; George S. Wuchinich, identified as a Communist; Jane Foster Zlatovsky, identified as a Soviet agent, etc., etc.

	...The O.S.S. knowingly, and over the objections of J. Edgar Hoover, recruited not only known Communists but also veterans of the infamous (subversive) Abraham Lincoln Brigade and members of the Brooklyn, N.Y. organization knon as Murder Incorporated who had been exposed as contract killers.

	Over 1,000 former O.S.S. personnel were transfered into the C.I.A. and, in addition to this, numerous others were taken into the C.I.A. on the reccomendation of Harold "Kim" Philby, a British Soviet agent who helped set up the C.I.A.


Donovan got hiring advice from his KGB agent friend (and maybe his secretary who was also a KGB agent), hired a bunch of communists, lied about it to Congress, then helped found the C.I.A. along with another KGB agent and got them to hire some of the same people he hired.


...

Sipher making a joke? either way, it's clear there are reasons to suspect some in the CIA of having an unusual agenda...


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/the-ic-is-not-a-murky-cabal-pulling-the-strings-in-washington
	Furthermore, to do my job well, I had to do everything in my power to protect my sources and would be the last person to endanger those brave patriots.


another joke?


	...The other side of this story is the allegation that the deep state is also withholding sensitive intelligence from the White House.  I also believe this to be extremely unlikely.  Personally, I cannot imagine any leader in the Intelligence Community deciding to withhold information. 


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venona_project
	For much of its history, knowledge of Venona was restricted even from the highest levels of government. Senior army officers, in consultation with the FBI and CIA, made the decision to restrict knowledge of Venona within the government (even the CIA was not made an active partner until 1952). Army Chief of Staff Omar Bradley, concerned about the White House's history of leaking sensitive information, decided to deny President Truman direct knowledge of the project.


goes against Sipher's assertion that IC never witholds information or denial of existance of a "deep state" (how did Venona continue through multiple presidencies without any of them knowing about it?)


------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/presidents-vs-the-kremlin

in this article Sipher and Stever Hall are very pessimistic on the possibility of cooperation between the U.S. and Russia


	...There is an American innocence born of living in a country protected by two oceans and friendly neighbors.  Most Americans don’t grow up worrying much about other countries.  We have a happy naiveté and sense of optimism that we can fix all problems if we put our minds to it.  We tend to think the best of others and believe that things will work out.


does he look down on them for that?



------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/how-the-kremlin-views-a-trump-presidency
	As former senior KGB officer Oleg Kalugin described it in an interview with CNN, collection is not really the “heart and soul” of Soviet/Russian intelligence.  Instead, they favor the arts of subversion – “active measures to weaken the West, to drive wedges in the Western community alliances, particularly NATO, to sow discord among allies, to weaken the United States in the eyes of the people of Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America, and thus to prepare ground in case the war really occurs.”  In Putin’s calculation, the competition with the U.S. is a zero sum game.  Anything that hurts the U.S. is seen as a gain for Russia.


Sipher cites Oleg "I don't believe they've ever employed more than 10 illegals at a time" Kalugin about active measures



------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/sloppiness-in-handling-highly-classified-information-is-widespread

Sipher defends Comey's decision not to indict Clinton


	FBI Director James Comey’s 5 July statement on the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s private e-mail server was exactly what we would expect from a professional investigative service.  He explained the issues in plain language, focused on facts, and made clear that the multitude of political opinions swirling around the case are uninformed and had no impact on the investigation.  However, I am certain that the Director’s recommendation to not indict Clinton will surprise many people who heard him reveal Clinton had mishandled classified information. 

	It may be difficult for many Americans to understand how anyone can have it both ways.  How can someone share classified information on an unclassified computer system and not be held accountable?  Why isn’t this a slam dunk?

	Realistically, however, Director Comey had no other choice.  To indict Hillary Clinton would raise the question as to why we don’t arrest scores of senior officials.

	The problem is that you can’t indict everybody.  Sadly, there are numerous incidents where senior officials who should have known better were, as Director Comey characterized, “extremely careless in the handling of very sensitive, highly classified information.”  This sloppiness is widespread.


his argument isn't very good. Why does he keep making bad arguments?


------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/considering-a-domestic-intelligence-service

https://www.thecipherbrief.com/column/expert-view/time-for-a-new-cia

some maybe inflamatory articles by Sipher on internal IC culture stuff


------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/former-cia-officer-on-trump-weve-been-here-before-2
	The first real effort of U.S. authorities to tackle the perceived threat of leftist radicals and anarchists was in 1919 when then Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer authorized a dragnet to arrest and deport radicals immediately following WWI.  At the time, there was a fear that communists and radical leftists were seeking to overthrow the government.  The future FBI Director, J. Edgar Hoover, led the fight for the Justice Department.  Unfortunately, the Palmer “Red Raids” went further than just arresting the perpetrators.  Instead, they rounded up and deported anyone associated with leftist activity in an effort to destroy the entire movement, jailing thousands of leftists who had no connection to criminal acts.  It is generally agreed that the massive overreaction and deportation of hundreds of innocents boomeranged against the government and tainted the anti-communist cause for decades to come. 

	By making the threat seem bigger and more insidious than it was in reality, Hoover and the Justice Department provided the left with a powerful weapon for future fights – the ability to paint anti-communists as the enemy of the Constitution and civil liberties. 


did they really make it "seem bigger and more insidious than it was in reality"? I thought the problem was that they politicized it or went after innocent people


------


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/on-russian-aggression
	The notion of Putin as a bully is not a new one, but anyone who has lived in Russia or spent time driving in Moscow traffic is familiar with the behavior. The loutish personality is a mixture of a post-Soviet inferiority complex and long-established Russian behavioral traits.


sipher keeps doing this--saying the Russians as a country are somehow culturally inferior


	Putin grew up as a pint-sized, unimpressive youth in a nasty post-war Soviet apartment block in Leningrad chasing rats around the hallways (having lived in a “nice” Soviet block, I can attest that even the decent buildings were dark, crumbling and smelled like urine).  Putin himself brags of his thuggish youth, boasting about his many fistfights.  He eventually was able to land his dream job in the KGB, but was shuffled off to the JV team, engaged in secret police work tracking dissidents rather than joining the elite foreign intelligence cadre. 


I guess Sipher is helping Putin


	...This behavior is not only Soviet but is also very “Russian.”  Marvin Kalb’s new book, Imperial Gamble, is an effort to explain Putin’s actions in Crimea and elsewhere as a natural extension of Russian history and the Russian personality.  Anyone who has lived in Russia has certainly witnessed this type of boorish and aggressive behavior.

	I cannot adequately describe the level of obnoxious and aggressive behavior of Russians drivers on the streets of Moscow.  If U.S. drivers were half as rude as the average Russian driver, road rage would be our number one cause of death.  Russians pass on the sidewalk, drive through parks, speed down oncoming lanes, and cut off other cars in the most dangerous ways imaginable.  Feel free to Google videos of Russian traffic.

	Likewise, Russians view every civic relationship outside the family with an element of distrust and every interaction as a power struggle.  No matter if the woman who works in the bread store is on the lowest wrung of society, when she is in a position of power behind the counter, she will consistently wield her position like a weapon.   At some point, most westerners living in Moscow will find themselves dumbfounded when they are physically bowled over by an elderly lady aggressively pushing her way into a queue.


this is excessive

does he expect Americans to buy this?


https://www.thecipherbrief.com/breaking-bond
	The most obvious difference between spy novels and real espionage – besides the violence – is that the fictional heroes always break into places themselves, steal their quarry, and then heroically extricate themselves.  Real spies know that it is more effective – if not always easier – to recruit someone inside to do your dirty work for you.


like the KGB?


------


https://twitter.com/john_sipher/status/970715929423343617
		
	John Sipher
	‏Verified account @john_sipher
	Mar 5

	Fantastic reporting by @JaneMayerNYer.  Real background and context rather than the typical partisan BS. Let the professionals work!



https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/03/12/christopher-steele-the-man-behind-the-trump-dossier
	Christopher Steele, the Man Behind the Trump Dossier
	How the ex-spy tried to warn the world about Trump’s ties to Russia.

	By Jane Mayer


	...As a British citizen, however, he was not especially knowledgeable about American politics. Peter Fritsch, a co-founder at Fusion who has worked closely with Steele, said of him, “He’s a career public-service officer, and in England civil servants haven’t been drawn into politics in quite the same way they have here. He’s a little naïve about the public square.”

	And so Steele, on that January night, was stunned to learn that U.S. politicians were calling him a criminal. He told Christopher Burrows, with whom he co-founded Orbis, that the sensation was “a feeling like vertigo.” Burrows, in his first public interview on the dossier controversy, recalled Steele telling him, “You have this thudding headache—you can’t think straight, you have no appetite, you feel ill.” Steele compared it to the disorientation that he had felt in 2009, when his first wife, Laura, had died, after a long illness, leaving him to care for their three young children.

	...It was not the first time that a congressional investigation had been used as a tool for destroying someone’s reputation. Whenever a scandal hit Washington, opponents used subpoenas, classified evidence, and theatrical public hearings to spread innuendo, confusion, and lies. Senators Grassley and Graham declined to be interviewed for this article

	...Both the criminal referral and Nunes’s report used secret evidence to malign Steele while providing no means for his defenders to respond without breaching national-security secrets...


	...According to people familiar with the matter, as Steele began to assemble the first of seventeen memos, which became the dossier, Burrows expressed reservations about including the golden-showers allegation. He had a cautious temperament, and worried about the impact that the sensational item might have. But Steele argued that it would be dishonest and distorting to cherry-pick details, and that the possibility of a potential American President being subject to blackmail was too important to hide. “That’s classic Steele,” his longtime friend told me. “He’s so straight.”

	...John Sipher spent twenty-eight years as a clandestine officer in the C.I.A., and ran the agency’s Russia program before retiring, in 2014. He said of Steele’s memos, “This is source material, not expert opinion.” Sipher has described the dossier as “generally credible,” although not correct in every detail. He said, “People have misunderstood that it’s a collection of dots, not a connecting of the dots. But it provided the first narrative saying what Russia might be up to.”



https://www.justsecurity.org/44697/steele-dossier-knowing/
	A second Look at the Steele Dossier

	by John Sipher

	...Almost immediately after the dossier was leaked, media outlets and commentators pointed out that the material was unproven. News editors affixed the terms “unverified” and “unsubstantiated” to all discussion of the issue in the responsible media.  Political supporters of President Trump simply tagged it as “fake news.”  Riding that wave, even legendary Washington Post reported Bob Woodward characterized the report as “garbage.”

	For professional investigators, however, the dossier is by no means a useless document.  Although the reports were produced episodically, almost erratically, over a five-month period, they present a coherent narrative of collusion between the Kremlin and the Trump campaign.  As a result, they offer an overarching framework for what might have happened based on individuals on the Russian side who claimed to have insight into Moscow’s goals and operational tactics.

	...Many of my former CIA colleagues have taken the Orbis reports seriously since they were first published.  This is not because they are not fond of Trump (and many admittedly are not), but because they understand the potential plausibility of the reports’ overall narrative based on their experienced understanding of both Russian methods, and the nature of raw intelligence reporting.


didn't the dossier say they were sending secret intelligence over the pension system or some weird shit like that

pained Russian intel as ad-hoc, mostly recruiting ethnic Russians with "tens of thousands of dollars involved"

also alleged piss tapes and said couldn't be that they had finincial blackmail on Trump (even though Trump a businessman with business involving Russia throughout his life...)


but a lot of Sipher's report right, that you can't take the whole thing as true and have to figure out which parts true or false


	...One clue as to the credibility of the sources in these reports is that Steele shared them with the FBI.  The fact that the FBI reportedly sought to work with him and to pay him to develop additional information on the sources suggest that at least some of them were worth taking seriously.  At the very least, the FBI will be able to validate the credibility of the sources, and therefore better judge the information.  As one recently retired senior intelligence officer with deep experience in espionage investigations quipped, “I assign more credence to the Steele report knowing that the FBI paid him for his research.  From my experience, there is nobody more miserly than the FBI.  If they were willing to pay Mr. Steele, they must have seen something of real value.”


but Steele was trapsing around leaking his shit to Buzzfeed and MotherJones and half of them decided it was a 100% legit intel report

and Steele was working for private intel for Clinton campaign before handing out his shifty dossier to everyone and causing a political fight

and now he might be a criminal

the whole way this dude acts makes him sound very *not* credible

FBI never paid him either

Sipher goes on to say the dossier has been "stunningly accurate"


	...In retrospect, there is even some indication that the salacious sexual allegations should not be dismissed out of hand.  Efforts to monitor foreigners and develop compromising material is completely consistent with Russian M.O.  I am certain that they have terabytes of film and audio from inside my apartment in Moscow.  Putin himself is known to have been implicated in several sex stings to embarrass his rivals, to include the famous broadcast of a clandestinely-acquired sex video to shame then Prosecutor General Yuriy Skuratov.

	Perhaps more intriguing, the most explosive charge in the Steele document was the claim that Trump hired prostitutes to defile a bed slept in by former President Obama.  The important factor to consider is that Trump did not engage with the prostitutes himself, but instead allegedly sought to denigrate Obama.  If there is anything consistent in what we have learned about President Trump, it seems that his policies are almost exclusively about overturning and eradicating anything related to President Obama’s tenure.  In this sense, he is akin to the ancient Pharaohs, Byzantine and Roman Emperors like Caligula, who sought to obliterate the existence of their predecessors, even destroying and defacing their images.  Is it inconceivable that he would get some satisfaction from a private shaming of the former President?


people like Sipher are probably the reason Trump thinks the CIA is behind the dossier


	...We, on the other hand, will have to do our best to validate the information at hand.  Looking at new information through the framework outlined in the Steele document is not a bad place to start.



Sipher also write "The Smearing of Christopher Steele" (https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/02/05/christopher-steele-dossier-smearing-216940)


interesting, here's a blog post picking apart Sipher's article on the dossier: https://www.emptywheel.net/2017/12/10/three-months-after-problematic-john-sipher-post-just-security-makes-clear-it-let-clear-errors-sit-for-two/

maybe started another IC fight?


http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2017/09/a_lot_of_the_steele_dossier_has_since_been_corroborated.html

"A lot of the Steele Dossier has Since Been Corraborated"

by John Sipher

------

Sipher features on RT:

https://www.rt.com/usa/420653-sipher-russophobic-tweet-backlash/
	‘How can one not be a Russophobe?’ – asks former CIA agent … and Twitter answers 

	The notion that some people might not identify as Russophobic is apparently so perplexing to former CIA agent John Sipher, that he felt the need to put the question to Twitter. Then he felt the need for some backtracking.

	“How can one not be a Russophobe?” the former spy, who once worked as the CIA’s Moscow bureau chief, tweeted.

	Sipher followed the question with a list of Russia’s alleged wrongdoings, including engaging in “political warfare,” “invading neighbors,” “threatening doomsday nuclear weapons” and “killing the opposition” at home. He then challenged his Twitter following to “name something positive” about Russia.

	No sooner than he had tweeted it, however, Sipher began to backtrack on his comment, confirming that he was only referring to the Russian government, not all Russian people. But it was too late. The backlash had already begun.

    	you do realize everything you just said applies to the US, right?



https://www.rt.com/op-ed/390715-james-clapper-russians-genetically-untrustworthy/
	Clapper said it during last Sunday’s episode of Meet The Press on NBC, during a response to a question about Jared Kushner’s ties to Moscow. The Russians are “typically, almost genetically driven to co-opt, penetrate, gain favor, whatever” — was the exact quote.

	...If there was a debate about Clapper’s comment and it was deemed somehow acceptable, that would be bad enough — but it’s actually worse than that, because anti-Russian sentiment is so deeply ingrained in the American psyche


saying hating Russia ingrained in America psych

kindof similar to what Sipher says, but flipped around...


https://lawfareblog.com/how-expelling-russian-diplomats-backfired-us
	John Sipher

	...While nobody should be against efforts to improve relations, let’s not fool ourselves as to who came out ahead in this contest. “Ending the feud” is exactly what the Russians want


------


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/13/opinion/cia-security-pompeo.html
	Don’t Muzzle Former C.I.A. Officers

	By CINDY OTIS, NED PRICE and JOHN SIPHER NOV. 13, 2017


on the contrary...



------


The Okhrana (or whatever you'd call them) had a role in shaping the OSS and the CIA.

They probably had similar roles in founding and staffing the intelligence agencies of a lot of countries, since they started revolutions all around the world and essentially founded those new governments.

The type of person who would be adept at speechcraft, deception, and manipulation, essential skills for politics and espionage, is the same type of person who would be suspectible to the elitist ideology outlined in "the protocols of zion" and other documents.

If people like Sipher and Steele are any indication, this group still has influence across the world's intelligence agencies to this day.