


https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/oct/09/topstories3.russia

question choice of Politkovskaya quotes



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wuObDu7_3UQ&t=13m06s

Kursk sinking coincident with political problems for Putin, maybe worth looking into, something off with the documentary



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_Anna_Politkovskaya
	Assassination

	On 7 October 2006, Politkovskaya was found shot dead in the elevator of her apartment block in central Moscow.[13][14] Police found a Makarov pistol and four shell casings beside her body. Reports indicated a contract killing, as she was shot four times, once in the head.[15][16]

	The assassination occurred on Vladimir Putin's birthday, a coincidence that did not go unnoticed.[17]

	The funeral was held on Tuesday, 10 October 2006, at 2:30 p.m. at the Troyekurovsky Cemetery. Before Politkovskaya was buried, more than 1,000 people filed past her coffin. Dozens of Politkovskaya's colleagues, public figures and admirers of her work gathered for the funeral.


https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/oct/10/russia.media
	And many blame the Kremlin for Politkovskaya's death. While her work never implicated Putin in anything that could have rocked his leadership, she was the scourge of bureaucrats and the hawkish security officers who dominate his administration. Vladimir Pribylovsky, an analyst from the Panorama thinktank, says Politkovskaya's enemies were numerous. "She was on at least six lists of 'enemies of the state' placed on the internet by ultra-nationalists. In one of the lists, 'for liquidation' was written next to her name."

	"Of course, no one believes that Putin sat in his office and said to two thugs, 'I want Politkovskaya dead'," says Viktor Shenderovich, a friend of the reporter who was driven off the NTV channel for lampooning the president in his programme Kukli, the Russian equivalent of Spitting Image. "But the fact is he has created the kind of country where it is possible to kill a journalist - maybe to please him - and then feel untouchable afterwards." For many, the fact that Politkovskaya was assassinated on Putin's birthday, and two days after Kadyrov's 30th birthday celebrations, raised suspicions that a henchman of one or both had served up the contract hit as an unasked-for present.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_reaction_to_the_assassination_of_Anna_Politkovskaya#Reaction_in_Russia
	On October 10, 2006, Russian president Vladimir Putin spoke out on the murder of Politkovskaya:

    	With regards to the murder of the journalist Anna Politkovskaia, then I have already said and I can say once again that this is a disgusting crime. To kill not only a journalist but also a woman and a mother. And the experts know well... that perhaps because Ms Politkovskaia held very radical views she did not have a serious influence on the political mood in our country. But she was very well known in journalistic circles and in human rights circles. And in my opinion murdering such a person certainly does much greater damage from the authorities’ point of view, authorities that she strongly criticized, than her publications ever did. Moreover, we have reliable, consistent information that many people who are hiding from Russian justice have been harbouring the idea that they will use somebody as a victim to create a wave of anti-Russian sentiment in the world. I do not know who has carried out this crime. But whoever they were and whatever their motives, they are criminals. They must be found, brought to justice and punished. The Russian authorities will do everything they can to ensure that this takes place.[8]


Putin a conspiracy theorist?


https://www.aljazeera.com/archive/2006/10/2008410135446230759.html
	Putin criticised over journalist remarks

	Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, has been criticised for saying that the murdered journalist Anna Politkovskaya had exerted little influence on Russian political life. 

	Putin was criticised in Russia and abroad for failing to speak about the murder in public until three days after the event.

	When he did speak of it on Tuesday during an official visit to Germany, he called it an "appalling" crime "that cannot go unpunished".

	But he went on to say: "I think that journalists should know, and experts perfectly understand, that her capacity to influence political life in Russia was extremely insignificant.

	"This murder inflicts far more damage on Russia, on the current authorities in Russia and in the Chechen republic which she worked on professionally recently, than her publications did."

	"Cold rage"

	Vitaly Yaroshevsky, the assistant editor of the Novaya Gazeta newspaper where Politkovskaya worked, said: "We're in a cold rage.

	"He said that Anna didn't have an influence on society a day after all the foreign papers had her face on the front page and many Russian papers did as well. She was the number one story even on television news channels he controls."



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Litvinenko#Assassination_of_Anna_Politkovskaya
	Two weeks before his poisoning, Alexander Litvinenko accused Vladimir Putin of ordering the assassination of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya and stated that a former presidential candidate, Irina Hakamada, warned Politkovskaya about threats to her life coming from the Russian president. Litvinenko advised Politkovskaya to escape from Russia immediately. Hakamada denied her involvement in passing any specific threats, and said that she warned Politkovskaya only in general terms more than a year earlier.[71] It remains unclear if Litvinenko referred to an earlier statement made by Boris Berezovsky, who claimed that Boris Nemtsov, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Russia, received word from Hakamada that Putin threatened her and like-minded colleagues in person. According to Berezovsky, Putin stated that Hakamada and her colleagues "will take in the head immediately, literally, not figuratively" if they "open the mouth" about the Russian apartment bombings.[72]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irina_Khakamada#cite_note-10
	Claims of receiving and passing threats

	On June 11, 2006 Boris Berezovsky, fugitive from Russian justice system, said Boris Nemtsov received a word from Khakamada that Putin threatened her and like-minded colleagues in person. According to Berezovsky Putin had issued threats that Khakamada and her colleagues "will take in the head immediately, literally, not figuratively" if they "open the mouth" about the Russian apartment bombings.[10]

	Former FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko said he had learned from Anna Politkovskaya that Putin asked Khakamada to pass a threat to Politkovskaya.[11] Khakamada denied her involvement in passing any specific threats, and said that she warned Politkovskaya only in general terms more than a year earlier, and that Politkovskaya blamed her and Mikhail Kasyanov for becoming Kremlin's puppets.[12] Politkovskaya and Litvinenko were murdered in October and November 2006, respectively.


Berezovksy:


https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/01/world/europe/killing-of-boris-nemtsov-putin-critic-breeds-fear-in-russia.html
	Fear Envelops Russia After Killing of Putin Critic Boris Nemtsov

	By Andrew E. Kramer

	MOSCOW — About two weeks before he was shot and killed in the highest-profile political assassination in Russia in a decade, Boris Y. Nemtsov met with an old friend to discuss his latest research into what he said was dissembling and misdeeds in the Kremlin.

	He was, as always, pugilistic and excited, saying he wanted to publish the research in a pamphlet to be called “Putin and the War,” about President Vladimir V. Putin and Russian involvement in the Ukraine conflict, recalled Yevgenia Albats, the editor of New Times magazine. Both knew the stakes.

	Mr. Nemtsov, a former deputy prime minister, knew his work was dangerous but tried to convince her that, as a former high official in the Kremlin, he enjoyed immunity, Ms. Albats said.

	“He was afraid of being killed,” Ms. Albats said. “And he was trying to convince himself, and me, they wouldn’t touch him because he was a member of the Russian government, a vice premier, and they wouldn’t want to create a precedent. Because as he said, one time the power will change hands in Russia again, and those who served Putin wouldn’t want to create this precedent.”

	On Saturday, it was still not clear who was responsible for killing Mr. Nemtsov. Some critics of the Kremlin accused the security services of responsibility, while others floated the idea of rogue Russian nationalists on the loose in Moscow.

	The authorities said they were investigating several theories about the crime, some immediately scorned as improbable, including the possibility that fellow members of the opposition had killed Mr. Nemtsov to create a martyr. Mr. Putin, for his part, vowed in a letter to Mr. Nemtsov’s mother to bring to justice those responsible.

	As supporters of Mr. Nemtsov laid flowers on the sidewalk where he was shot and killed late Friday, a shiver of fear moved through the political opposition in Moscow.

	The worry was that the killing would become a pivot point toward a revival of lethal violence among the leadership elite in Moscow and an intensified climate of fear in Russian domestic politics.

	“Another terrible page has been turned in our history,” Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the exiled former political prisoner, wrote in a statement about the killing.

	“For more than a year now, the television screens have been flooded with pure hate for us,” he wrote of the opposition to Mr. Putin. “And now everyone from the blogger at his apartment desk to President Putin, himself, is searching for enemies, accusing one another of provocation. What is wrong with us?”

	...Irina Khakamada, a former member of Parliament, suggested in an interview with Snob magazine that splinter groups in the security service intent on retaining Soviet practices, or “radical frozen ones, who think anything is allowed,” could be to blame.


https://translate.google.com/translate?sl=ru&tl=en&js=y&prev=_t&hl=en&ie=UTF-8&u=https%3A%2F%2Fecho.msk.ru%2Finterview%2F44072%2F&edit-text=&act=url
	B. Berezovsky: I fully agree with you, although recently I had one wonderful scene, I can not not share it with you, you know that I have been trying to prove for a long time and consistently that the explosions in Moscow were organized by special services. And I recently had an absolutely amazing scene - you know, the court was recently in London, and as a witness Mr. Fridman - I was tried against Friedman, Friedman invited Nemtsov, invited Aven, Potanin - but Potanin did not come, and Nemtsov with Aven came. And yet, you know, I have a very complicated attitude towards Nemtsov, I thought that certainly he came there to lie, which, in fact, the court basically confirmed - he did not believe in the testimony of any of the witnesses of Fridman, did not believe the testimony of Friedman himself, and therefore ruled in my favor. But, nevertheless, Nemtsov,in the very short space of my meeting with him in court, first, he informed me that he did not come by his own will, that Friedman asked him, because Friedman enlisted the support of the president in this trial - they were sure that they would win. But most important, of course, he told me another. He told me that ... when we talked about it ... well, you say a lot about this in your articles - that the right-wingers only imitate their democracy, in fact, they are the facade of the existing power, and when I told Nemtsov - that They still did not say anything about the explosions of apartment buildings in Moscow. Nemtsov said that he had received a clear ... clear ... clear message from Khakamada, who said that she was personally told by Putin that if they open their mouths about the apartment bombings in Moscow, they will get over the head straight away. And not in the figurative, but in the literal sense.And this, of course, once again convinced me of my absolute rightness - that yes, the explosions were organized by the special services of the Russian Federation. And I agree with you ...



Litvinenko:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dXBOOkMC--I
	Someone has asked me directly: who is guilty of Anna's death?

	And I can directly answer you: it is Mr. Putin, the president of the Russian Federation, who is guilty.

	And I can tell you the facts, and you can make your own conclusions.

	I have been her friend for three years. I have very close links and ties with her.

	Every visit to London, I met her.

	And she visited me at home, she knew my wife, my child.

	And she asked me about if the FSB, the Russian secret service, about their methods.

	After her book was published, her book Putin's Russia, she had quite a number of threats, which became more frequent, directly from the Kremlin.

	And during one of our last meetings, she asked me directly, can they kill me? do you think they can kill me? And I told her, quite frankly yes they can, and I really suggest that you leave the country, for at least a moment, for a period.

	She said that Putin threatened her. He had passed the threats via Irina Hakamada, because Anna was a friend of Irina Hakamada, and Hakamada used to frequent the Kremlin. And she was still... the threat was directly from Putin.

	I am not trying to hide anything so I could be witness in court, you can actually directly quote me. I used to work on the Listyev [ph] case, on his murder, and got quite a lot of evidence on his murder. I took it to the Russian prosecution bodies, ten days later I was arrested. They searched my flat, and they removed and destroyed all the evidence of his death.

	I know who had contracted his killing, people directly from the Kremlin, I know the contractors themselves, I know the motivation of those contractors, I have all the evidence. And I'm totally confident that only one person in Russian can kill someone like Anna Politkovskaya with her standing, her fame, and that is Putin.

	I know that the special services control the country entirely, I know how tightly they control it. A journalist of her level, of her standing, could not be touched without the sanctions from above, from the president himself.

	Without politburo, in the former Soviet Union, no KGB official could actually ?? a dissident, so they had to get sanction of the politburo.

	Anna was a political opponent ?? so Putin killed her. And as soon as the regime in Russia changes, we'll know the facts.



https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&tl=en&u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.yoki.ru%2Fsocial%2Fpolitics%2F24-11-2006%2F34284-khakamada-0%2F
	For comments Yoki.ru appealed directly to Irina Mutsuovna:

	- To what extent is it true that Putin, through you, transmitted threats to Anna Politkovskaya?

	- Well, are you out of your mind! Since I was last in the Kremlin for three years. For three years I did not visit the Kremlin - I did not go to either Putin, Surkov, or anyone else.

	"But why were you dragged into this story?"

	- I do not know, I'm always trying to get something into something. I do not know what they need from me. This is nonsense, you know, I can not say anything, it's nonsense. I think that Litvinenko did not know anything. He has long been living in London, so I do not understand how he could know. I saw his press conference on the Internet and did not understand anything.

	- Maybe this was done in order to discredit you and even more split the Democrats?

	- Perhaps the attitude of the democrats will deteriorate. They will say that I was bought by the Kremlin - that's all. But this generally does not shake anything, because the Democrats are already microbes.

	- And how would you comment on the murder of Litvinenko in this case?

	- I can not comment on nonsense. I do not know what's going on in London. It's such a dark story that it's impossible to understand anything. 


https://translate.google.com/translate?sl=ru&tl=en&js=y&prev=_t&hl=en&ie=UTF-8&u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.svoboda.org%2Fa%2F317342.html&edit-text=
	We will talk today about parties, about what is happening with party building; that the ruling party presented the program to the country and the people; about how one can regard the successes of the right in Perm law; probably, about what happens to the dollar at the end of the season and the new year. And I'll start (we will not avoid this question anyway, let's deal with it right away) from Litvinenko's theme, because you are in this story. To answer and do not come back to this.

	Presenting the essence of the topic to our listeners, who does not know, Litvinenko even said before his death, and there is video confirmation that you would have warned Anna Politkovskaya about a possible attempt on her life. You categorically deny the whole story. How do you think, where, with what and how is it connected? 

	Irina Khakamada: Well, his kingdom is heavenly, I do not want to recoup at all this murder, because it's a very dark history, no one can understand anything. I do not like to comment on such stories. The only thing that, really, I myself also looked at the Internet and was convinced myself: he told a press conference that I was Anna Politkovskaya's friend and transmitted the threats of her life, proceeding from a source in the Kremlin. Since I often visited the Kremlin, I had such information. Something like this was said.

	Anna Kachkayeva: The press conference was autumn, if I'm not mistaken, recently.

	Irina Khakamada: Yes, it was autumn. Of course, I was completely shocked. Because, firstly, I was formally in the Kremlin for the last time when I was still vice-speaker, it was still in the previous parliament, before our loss, and then at some kind of collective event, nothing more. And after that she did not support either Surkov or the Kremlin, even with people from the Kremlin did not support any political ties and so on. I do not go there, I do not call, nobody calls me and nobody goes, I do not negotiate. And at first in the presidential campaign I was accused that I was playing for the Kremlin, legitimizing the elections. Then, after my statement on the "Nord-Ost", everyone relaxed; The Kremlin stiffened, and everyone who suspected, relaxed. And then, it seems, the story of my going to the Kremlin was over. And suddenly she again in some completely wrong form and untruthfully jumps out at Litvinenko that it was unprofitable for him, because it refutes at all ... if the part does not match, then everything is refuted. And this was used by those who would like to refute what he said. And I, of course, was surprised.

	Secondly, I have great respect for Anna Politkovskaya and always respected her as a very honest, radical, a little bit of such a romantic fan. And, like all normal people, I felt that if I acted like this, there was danger over her. And of course - for a long time, it's true, it was about a year and a half ago - I told her: "Be careful, please, be more careful."

	Anna Kachkayeva: However, many people have told Anna about this. 

	Irina Khakamada: Yes, many people said, because I feel sorry for everyone, and I want their deaths and death to not be like that. You know, nothing happens anyway, but there is no person.

	Anna Kachkayeva: But it was really a year and a half ago, or, perhaps, quite recently, and so Litvinenko had some opportunity to retell some of your conversation with Anna?

	Irina Khakamada: No, that's just the point, to which I was surprised that even this conversation was not recently. It was just the opposite, that is, remember, we had a Democratic Congress, and there Anna spoke sharply and blamed everyone, me and Kasyanov, and everyone that we all go to the Kremlin, we are not all real oppositionists. Therefore, I did not understand anything and decided that I can not understand and understand this, and refused any comments. The exception was made for you, because our main theme is not this one. 



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/01/28/with-his-dying-words-poisoned-spy-alexander-litvinenko-named-putin-as-his-killer/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.3cedb98e34f9

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/6180262.stm


suspicious, "Death of a Dissident" also ghost-written in Litvinenko's name



-----


What's her game?


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MOhgDA8W2w


friends with opposition figures, "liberal reformer" types

delivers death threats that implicate Putin then denies it

ran for president


https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&u=http://hakamada.ru/&prev=search

writes weird sounding books and business advice


https://prabook.com/web/irina.khakamada/722502

Communist Party Member, then "Party of Economic Freedom," then "Union of Rightist Forces," (ran as president got 4%)

has her own clothing line


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ae4xO9cp6-U

what's going on with this?

adressed Putin about war in Ukraine



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irina_Khakamada
	Irina Khakamada was an elected Duma representative from 1993 to 2003. She is commonly regarded as a democratic politician who is in a moderate opposition to the Russian government. She is known for criticizing the governmental actions during Moscow theater hostage crisis where she was involved as one of the negotiators. Khakamada stated that the hostage takers were not going to use their bombs to kill the people and destroy the building.[4] This opinion was supported by other negotiators including Anna Politkovskaya and by the subsequent events when the Chechens did not use their bombs.


her and Anna were negotiations in theatre hostage crisis



http://www.radicalparty.org/it/node/5068804
	Irina Khakamada stated that the president of Russia Vladimir Putin had personally given the order to use the gas during the operation to release hostages in the Theater center on Dubrovka in 2002. On Wednesday, in the central Russian newspapers and, in particular, in "Commersant", the open letter by the candidate for the presidency Irina Khakamada "to the citizens of the country who fell victim to the state terrorism" was published as an advertisement. As Gazeta.ru writes, this letter is, as a matter of fact, the pre-election manifest of one of main contenders of Vladimir Putin at presidential elections and at the same time it is a personal challenge to the current president.

	"Earlier I did not publicize much of what I saw in the Theater center and especially the way the president and members of his administration treated my attempt to rescue people. I did not speak about it earlier because I was deluding myself thinking that the president Putin finally would help to establish the truth and repent of his order to use killing gas", Khakamada admits in her appeal. Now she decided to react to the appeal of the relatives of those who died as a result of explosions of apartment houses in Moscow in 1999 and during the storm of "Nord-Ost". On January 12, they called on all candidates for the presidency to give their estimation of these terrorist acts and their investigation and to help to get at the truth and to punish those guilty.

	"As a result of my negotiations with the terrorists in the Theater center on October 23, 2002, and the subsequent events, I came to the conviction that the terrorists hadn't plan to blow up the theater center and the authorities hadn't been interested in the rescue of all hostages", Khakamada says. "Appraising what happened, I come to an inevitable conclusion: this terrorist act helped to stir up the anti-Chechen hysteria, to continue the war in Chechnya and to preserve the high rating of the president. I am convinced that the actions of the president Putin to conceal the truth in this situation are, as a matter of fact, a treason, for this reason I took the decision to nominate myself for the presidency". She promised that when she would become a president, "the citizens of Russia will know the truth about explosions of houses, about the tragedy in the Theater center and about many other crimes of the authorities".

	According to Khakamada, her friends dissuade her from this idea and say that she will simply be assasinated if she tells the truth. Mother of two children, Khakamada is not afraid of such finale as she "is not afraid of terrorists from the power" in general.


yet she told something different to Politovskaya and Nemstov...
