

https://www.nytimes.com/1975/01/03/archives/cia-in-68-gave-secret-service-a-report-containing-gossip-about.html


Ertha Kitt one of the agentura?

timing of coming out against Vietnam War in that way could be worth looking into

if the CIA was getting close to something, this would help impugn a motive on them if they made a move.

Hopefully, the CIA was looking for ways to stop the Vietnam war...


report says Kitt antagonistic toward Lady Bird and made her emotional, but LB known to be tougher than that. From LB's diary according to USA Today: "Even Lady Bird in her private diary wrote, “One paper said that I was pale and that my voice trembled slightly as I replied to Miss Kitt. I think that is correct. I did not have tears in my eyes as another paper said.”"

article by Seymore Hersh


report says secret service asked CIA for the dossier on Kit, presumably because of her actions at the WH dinner

in Hersh's telling, Kitt had no contact with foreign agents according to the CIA report, but did breifly work for an "organizer of Communist front groups"


according to USA today:


https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2018/02/16/eartha-kitt-and-lady-bird-johnson-vietnam/321602002/
	Unable to get jobs in the United States, Kitt was forced to perform in Europe until she returned to America in 1978 to headline the Broadway musical Timbuktu! It was later unveiled by the New York Times that the CIA, prompted by the Secret Service in 1968, had kept a dossier on her.  

	"It was really heart-breaking to her and very upsetting that her own government turned on her for something as simple as just giving an honest response to a question," said Kitt Shapiro, Eartha Kitt's daughter. "And that was really something, I think, that she really never let go of, that disappointment. 


this sounds off--according to Hersh's article, the CIA report had info from a confidential informant from 1956, and the report was produced 1968, which would mean they were spying on her before then. 

article by Mabinty Quarshie

https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2018/02/16/eartha-kitt-and-lady-bird-johnson-vietnam/321602002/
	Kitt's career rebounded after her return in 1978, which was accompanied by an invitation to return to the White House that year by President Jimmy Carter. By the time of her death from colon cancer in 2008, she had earned two Tony nominations, a Grammy nomination, won three Daytime Emmys, and had transformed from kitten to full-blown cougar goddess.

	And fifty years after her career nearly derailed, black celebrity activism remains just as controversial and influential.


this significant? Hersh made it clear in article NY times had a copy of the report, and included allusions to Kitt saying disparaging things about black people


if Kitt an agent, why have her attack LB?



------


http://www.firstladies.org/biographies/firstladies.aspx?biography=37
	Outside of Vietnam War policy and other foreign affairs decisions, Mrs. Johnson had considerable influence over the President. She critiqued his speeches, often offering suggestions for improvements. He confided the details of the crises and issues facing him daily.. She offered pragmatic and realistic solutions to his more impulsive reactionsShe purposefully inserted herself when matters of his personal well-being were at hand. She exercised enormous control over his diet, sleeping habits and general health matters. Lady Bird Johnson also reprimanded LBJ' when he acted spontaneously but with potentially damaging press reaction, such as giving ten-gallon cowboy hats to the Japanese prime minister and foreign minister. She was highly conscious of how even inconsequential acts shaped public perception of his presidency. 


says LB didn't have "considerable influence" over Vietnam policy

	...The first signs of anti-war sentiment that the First Lady encountered came during her hosting of a unique White House Festival of the Arts, the first such presidential effort to showcase artistic disciplines including painting, writing, poetry, and sculpture, by leading contemporary figures. The problems began when Robert Lowell publicly withdrew his initial acceptance to read his poetry because of his opposition to the war. Other writers then signed an open letter of war protest that was published in national newspapers. During an afternoon reading, author John Hersey went through with his threat to read his anti-war poem "Hiroshima," frequently glaring at the First Lady. Although she knew Hersey had been intending to read the poem and made it clear that she did not want him to do so, she did not withdraw the invitation. In 1967, her events were increasingly overshadowed by anti-war protestors carrying picket signs and chanting slogans.

	When she spoke at new Center for Environmental Studies at Williams College, she was met by an army of students in white armbands, mourning those killed in Vietnam. As she was introduced, many students walked out. As she was leaving the event, she heard a low buzz of students repeating, "Shame, shame." At Yale, she was greeted with harshly-worded picket signs and a university president who sympathized with the protesting students. The most dramatic confrontation posed to the First Lady over the Vietnam War occurred in the White House itself, at an 18 January, 1968 "Women Do-Er" luncheons. One of her guests, actress-singer and social activist Eartha Kitt stood up and sharply confronted the First Lady about the effects of the Vietnam War on juvenile delinquency. Lady Bird Johnson calmly responded that as horrible as the war was, it did not serve as justification for violence or the prevention of constructive efforts in other aspects of national life. Kitt's remarks shocked the public: no such previous type of incident had occurred in the White House, let alone intended for a First Lady who had no direct responsibility for the policy being questioned.


both John Hershy and Kitt glared at LB while yelling about Vietnam, also got flak from students and uni professors


	Publicly, Lady Bird Johnson strongly supported her husband but there is indication that she privately questioned the actual results of the frequent bombings urged by LBJ's military advisors. In 1987, she would state that the Vietnam War was "long" and "undeclared," and that if ever a similar situation arose, "it had sure better be preceded by an Alamo or a Pearl Harbor so that there is a clear-cut declaration and coalescing of the American people." However personally painful the anti-war movement could be to her family, Lady Bird Johnson wrote in a 1967 entry in her diary that she did "not want to live only in the White House, insulated against life. I want to know what is going on…"

	Even within the protective bubble of her movements as First Lady, she was highly conscious of the war and its affects at home. When she returned to Washington late one night in a festive mood, for example, and glimpsed floral wreaths being unloaded at Union Station, she turned somber, knowing immediately they were for fresh graves in Arlington National Cemetery.


says LB was privately against the war


	...The war had also taken a visible toll on LBJ's health. Conscious not only of how he limited his hours of rest but his previous near-fatal heart attack, Lady Bird Johnson began to sense that his seeking re-election would be a mistake. She felt this way not only in terms of his personal health, but also his decreased ability to lead a united nation. She firmly made her views known in another lengthy memo. When he decided not to seek the Democratic nomination for another term, it was the First Lady who insisted that he add the phrase "I will not accept" to prevent any possibility of another term. 


this the real reason LBJ decided not to run again? his cheif of staff gives a different story:

http://www.nytimes.com/1988/04/16/opinion/behind-lbj-s-decision-not-to-run-in-68.html


changes story slightly in 2008, giving more weight to LB's advice:

http://articles.latimes.com/2008/mar/30/opinion/op-jones30
	Connally argued that Johnson should retire. Mrs. Johnson, in a more delicate and indirect style, implied that she also hoped the president would not run again.


I think this was after LB's diary released?

this part ominous:


	...But I believe that the most important reason he decided not to run again was his passionate desire to conclude the Vietnam War honorably. His middle-of-the-night awakenings to get the casualties report; his ongoing concern about the safety of his son-in-law, Chuck Robb, who was a Marine officer in the thick of heavy combat; his personal sense of responsibility each time he met with troops soon to be heading to Vietnam; and his growing sense of the futility of achieving total victory -- all of this had taken a toll on his vitality.


Is that really the reason he didn't run? If he wanted to end the Vietnam war, why not run again and end it himself? ended up with Nixon ramping up Vietnam instead


	In many of our discussions, he said that if he did not seek reelection, he would be free to explore all options to conclude the war. If he did run, however, politics would interfere. "What if the opportunity came late in the campaign; I might want to wait until after the election for fear it might be misinterpreted and cost us votes," he once said, "and then the opportunity might have been lost."


ok, saying he wanted to end the war as a "lame duck" president and would be "tied up in politics" if running again

does that even make sense? either way, he didn't end the war in the rest of his term.



------


https://millercenter.org/president/lbjohnson/foreign-affairs
	The major initiative in the Lyndon Johnson presidency was the Vietnam War. By 1968, the United States had 548,000 troops in Vietnam and had already lost 30,000 Americans there. Johnson's approval ratings had dropped from 70 percent in mid-1965 to below 40 percent by 1967, and with it, his mastery of Congress. "I can't get out, I can't finish it with what I have got. So what the hell do I do?" he lamented to Lady Bird. Johnson never did figure out the answer to that question.


what did Lady Bird say?


	...For Johnson, the decision to continue the Vietnam commitment followed the path of his predecessors. He was committed to maintaining an independent South Vietnam and to achieving success in Southeast Asia. As a senator, he had embraced "containment theory," which predicted that if Vietnam fell to Communists, other Southeast Asian nations would do the same. Johnson was deeply sensitive about the judgment of history, and he did not want to be remembered as a President who lost Southeast Asia to Communism.


Johnson bought containment theory, didn't want to be the president to lose Vietnam


	...Thus the Vietnam conflict could be seen through three lenses: (1) it was a civil war between pro- and anti-Diem groups in the South; (2) it was a war of reunification waged by the North against the South; and (3) it was viewed by the United States as part of the conspiracy by the Sino-Soviet bloc to conquer the Third World and install Communist regimes. Throughout the conflict, American Presidents were unwilling to see South Vietnam conquered by Communist forces, and thus each of them made the same commitment to forestall a Communist victory. Presidents Truman and Eisenhower had commenced American involvement there by sending military advisers. Kennedy had begun assigning Special Forces military personnel to Vietnam, ostensibly in an advisory capacity as well, and there were about 20,000 there when he was assassinated in 1963.

	...When Johnson took office, he affirmed the Kennedy administration's commitments. He quickly approved NSAM 273, a national security agency memorandum, on November 26, 1963, which directed the U.S. government "to assist the people and Government of South Vietnam to win their contest against the externally directed and supported Communist conspiracy." When counterinsurgency failed, Johnson began to escalate U.S. commitments. Johnson approved OPLAN 34A-64 on January 16, 1964, calling for stepped up infiltration and covert operations against the North to be transferred from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to the military. After operation Hop Tac failed to clear Communist guerillas from areas near Saigon, Johnson approved NSAM 288 in late March 1964, calling for more U.S. involvement in South Vietnamese affairs and a greater use of U.S. force, including planning for air strikes against North Vietnam. In August 1964, after reports that U.S. naval vessels had been attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin, Johnson asked Congress for a resolution of support. By a vote of 98 to 2 in the Senate and a unanimous vote in the House, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, authorizing the President to take all measures necessary to protect the armed forces. Johnson would later use this as a "functional equivalent" to a declaration of war, though his critics would respond that he should have gone to Congress for a formal declaration.


basically was the one to ramp up Vietnam to full scale U.S. war


	...One of Johnson's major problems was that Hanoi was willing to accept the costs of continuing the war indefinitely and of absorbing the punishing bombing. It would do so until the United States decided to give up its commitment to aid the South. McNamara and his "war game" analysts in the Department of Defense failed to account adequately for this eventuality.


sent troops to south and bombed north, but misunderstood enemy


	...Six weeks into 1968 came the hammer blow to the Johnson presidency: The North Vietnamese, shrewdly discerning that America was losing heart for the endless bloodletting, staged dozens of near-suicidal attacks all over the South. Known as the Tet Offensive, it held some similarities to the unsuccessful strategy attempted by the Japanese two decades earlier with their kamikaze attacks: inflict great casualties regardless of cost to your own forces, sap enemy morale, and force the dispirited foe to adopt your terms. Only this time, the strategy worked. Despite fearsome losses by the North Vietnamese—nearly 100,000—American opposition to the war surged. Although the North Vietnamese Army was never able to defeat U.S. forces on the battlefields of Vietnam, Hanoi's political strategy defeated America's will to continue to escalate the war. Television screens brought images of endless and seemingly pointless battles to living rooms across the nation. Although Americans still supported the goal of a non-Communist Vietnam, public confidence in the President and Johnson's popularity continued their sharp declines.


tet offensive in 1968 came with growing domestic opposition to war


	Just weeks from the early presidential primaries, Johnson was utterly vilified by those opposing our involvement in Vietnam. LBJ complained to his cabinet that the only place he could give a campaign speech now was on an aircraft carrier.


Is this what he really cared about? article gives impression all he cared about was his image and legacy, not all the death


	...A month after the Tet Offensive came New Hampshire, the site of the first presidential primary: McCarthy ran astoundingly well against the beleaguered President, winning 41 percent of the vote, and John F. Kennedy's brother Robert entered the race as well. A few weeks later, Johnson stunned the nation by announcing that he would not seek another term as President. A terrible spring and summer ensued. The murders of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy and a bloody confrontation between police and protesters at the Democratic Convention in Chicago sent shock waves through the nation. Just weeks before the elections, Johnson announced a halt in the bombings of North Vietnam in a desperate attempt to portray his administration as peacemakers. In the fall, Richard Nixon won the presidency, defeating the Democratic nominee, Hubert Humphrey, by claiming he had a "secret plan" to end the conflict. Meanwhile, the war dragged on.


I guess death of Robert Kennedy and LBJ declining to run cleared the way for Nixon


	...The blemish on Johnson's record in the region occurred in the Dominican Republic. Johnson backed an unpopular right-wing politician, Reid Cabral, who had taken power over the popularly elected Juan Bosch in 1962. A civil insurrection designed to restore Bosch was quelled when Johnson sent in 20,000 Marines. Later, troops from the Organization of American States replaced the Marines. But Johnson had not simply sent in forces to protect American lives and property, he had done so to quell what he described as "a band of communist conspirators." Johnson had acted to prevent "another Cuba" on the U.S. doorstep. Bosch, although a left-winger, was neither a Communist nor a Castro follower, and the move was highly unpopular in Latin America because of the history of U.S. intervention in the region.


invaded Domincan Republic for some reason (why haven't I heard of this)


LBJ sounds like overall shit president


why does media in U.S. prop him up?


one theory: people like LBJ, Teddy Roosevelt, FDR, even Nixon (https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/us-politics/9780832/Richard-Nixons-dark-side-has-obscured-his-greatness.html) and Bush can be used as props to divide U.S. and the rest of the world. Choose a U.S. president who had an ok domestic policy but terrible foreign policy, build him up in U.S. and tear him down everywhere else. Kindof the same way they use Trump to divide left and right in U.S.

