

Hauptman's ladder


Location 1272

ill-timed tabloid peice makes Lindbergh worry he has to give more money

Condon writes secret letter to Bronx Home News in response

reporter Laura Vitra wrote about communicating via ads in the paper regarding the case

	"Now, if the object of these personals was to slip word to the kidnapers without arousing the attentions of the police, the secret service, or the press, they were couched in language that was a hopeless giveaway." The book also makes clear the media were stamped as to the identity of Jafsie. Mss. Vitra claims that the press speculated that Jafsie was possible Rev. Dobson-Peacock.


The Great Lindbergh Hullabaloo: An Unorthodox Account


------

Location 1642


issued pamphlet with serial numbers of random money to banks.

	...While no mention was made of the Lindbergh case in the pamphlet, it was not difficult for the press to make the connection. Based on a tip from a bank teller in New Jersey, the Newark News published an article on April 8 announcing that the Lindberghs had paid a ransom and the child had not been returned. Wthin a few hours, the story was in every major newspaper in the country.

	Lindbergh was furious. With the papers reporting the serial numbers of the ransom money, it would be nearly impossible to establish further contact with the kidnapper.


------


Location 2010

confession of Curtis says:

	...I desire to state that my remarks about the newspapers are true and can be verified, this in reference to my story about Mr. Haskell and Mr. Wilcox of the Herald Tribune, Mr. Lee of the News and Mr. Turin and Mr. Fox, offering me money of my knowledge of the Lindbergh case or pictures of the baby.



------

Location 2383


	...Not everyone was convinced of the cotro's sincerity. Some felt it too convenient that the kidnapper responded so quickly to Condon's letter in a small local newspaper. Perhaps he was a conspirator.



------


Location 3167

	
	...He also denied reading the Bronx Home News, but then said, "Sometimes the paper lays on the steps of the house there. Sometimes I take it up but I never read it."

	This statement is very important because it shows that the newspaper used by Jafsie Condon to communicate with the kidnappers was readily available to Hauptmann right on his front porch.



------


Location 5053

	...Brecinridge testified that he was the one actually responsible for posting the various newspaper advertisements used to communicate with the kidnapper.



------


Location 7160

	
	...As arranged, the Associated Press reporter sent a coded message intending to signal the return of the jury. Unfortunately, he inadvertently sent the wrong code and mistakenly informed the world that Haumptmann had been found guilty, but given a reccomendation of mercy. As a result of this error, some newspapers were issued reporting Hauptmann's life sentence.



------


Location 7410


	..I have concluded that the "table board confession," as it has come to be known, is both a hoax and a significant peice of evidence. It is not a true confession from one of the kidnapeprs and it is not the actual template used y Hauptmann. I reach this conclusion for three reasons. First, there is no evidence showing that this table existedin 1932, the year of the kidnapping and creation of the letters. There are no surviving police reports, though numerous newspaper articles exist. Unfortunately, these news accounts have such glaring factual erorrs that it is difficult to rely upon their content.



------


Location 7664


	...The discovery of Anne's footprints was the basis of the newspaper reports' claims that the baby was kidnapped by two people, a man and a woman.



------


Location 7712


	...Many of the books on this case state that the floor plans of the house were printed in newspapers and magazines. Only one article reproduced floor plans: "Two Houses in the International Style," House Beautiful, Oct 1931, 307-9, 356. However, this article contains design plans of a hypothetical house for Lindbergh. It is not itentical to the Sourland home and would have been of no use to the kidnapper.


------


Location 7886


	Condon himself wrote that he knew several metropolital newspapers were suspicious that he was Jasfie (Condon, Jafsie Tells All, 176)




------


Location 8722, 8831, and 8832

references newspapers entered into evidence



Location 9981 has index on communication through newspapers




------


Location 2499


	...The concerned father issued a written statement to the press that was read by COlonel Breckinridge. It read:

	Mr. Lindbergh and I have made our hom in New Jersy. It is naturally our wish to continue to live ther enear our friend and interests. Obviously, however, it is impossible for us to subject the life of our second son to the publicity which we feel was in large measure responsible for the death of our first.

	We fell that our children have a right to grow up normally with other children. Continued publicity will make this impossible. I am appealing to the rpess to permit our chidlren to lead the lives of normal Americans.



why did they think the publicity was responsible for their son's death?


	
	Lindbergh might as well have spat in the wind. The press continued to cover his every move without hesitation or remorse. To make matters worse, almost from the moment Jon was born, letters started pouring in from  various lunatics threatening to kidnap the child.

	One letter was particularly disturbing. It demanded that $50,000 be left in a rotten stump "near a big white pine tree" in Roanoke, Virginia, or Jon would be kidnapped and killed. There was also a cruel reference to the kidnapping of Charles Jr., claiming that the child died because the Lindberghs called the police. A few other letters from the same crackpot arrived a few days later.



------


he ended up with plenty of reasons to hate the press

then apparently saw an influence operation in the U.S. to push them to war


did he see the press as coordinating with each other? should read his speeches and articles on this more



------


lardner says this guy, Lindbergh's friend since 1930 (about when kidnapper claims he started planning the murder), influenced his Nazi views

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexis_Carrel
	...In 1902, he was claimed to have witnessed the miraculous cure of Marie Bailly at Lourdes, made famous in part because she named Carrel as a witness of her cure.[citation needed] After the notoriety surrounding the event, Carrel could not obtain a hospital appointment because of the pervasive anticlericalism in the French university system at the time.


con artist? odds heavily are that he's lying, but why would someone lie about that?


	...In the 1930s, Carrel and Charles Lindbergh became close friends not only because of the years they worked together but also because they shared personal, political, and social views. Lindbergh initially sought out Carrel to see if his sister-in-law's heart, damaged by rheumatic fever, could be repaired. When Lindbergh saw the crudeness of Carrel's machinery, he offered to build new equipment for the scientist. Eventually they built the first perfusion pump, an invention instrumental to the development of organ transplantation and open heart surgery. Lindbergh considered Carrel his closest friend, and said he would preserve and promote Carrel's ideals after his death.[8]

	Due to his close proximity with Jacques Doriot's fascist Parti Populaire Français (PPF) during the 1930s and his role in implementing eugenics policies during Vichy France, he was accused after the Liberation of collaboration, but died before the trial.


Lindbergh sought Carrel to help his sister, became close friends


Carrel was to be on trial for being a Nazi collaborator


	...Carrel was also interested in the phenomenon of senescence, or aging. He claimed that all cells continued to grow indefinitely, and this became a dominant view in the early 20th century.[17] Carrel started an experiment on January 17, 1912, where he placed tissue cultured from an embryonic chicken heart in a stoppered Pyrex flask of his own design.[18] He maintained the living culture for over 20 years with regular supplies of nutrient. This was longer than a chicken's normal lifespan. The experiment, which was conducted at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, attracted considerable popular and scientific attention.[19]

	Carrel's experiment by some was never successfully replicated, and in the 1960s Leonard Hayflick and Paul Moorhead proposed that differentiated cells can undergo only a limited number of divisions before dying. This is known as the Hayflick limit, and is now a pillar of biology.[17]

	L. Hayflick has shown that a cell has a limited number of divisions, equal to the so called "Hayflick’s Limit." However, L. Franks and others (Loo et al. 1987; Nooden and Tompson 1995; Frolkis 1988a), have shown that the number of cell divisions can be considerably greater than that stipulated by the "Hayflick Limit", having practically no limit at all.

	It is not certain how Carrel obtained his anomalous results. Leonard Hayflick suggests that the daily feeding of nutrient was continually introducing new living cells to the alleged immortal culture.[20]


he came up with a theory that became dominant but was wrong, and backed it up with an experiment that was popularized in press but couldn't be reproduced

was he lying again? (and if so, why?)

reminiscent of Lysenko


	...In 1902 Alexis Carrel went from being a skeptic of the visions and miracles reported at Lourdes to being a believer in spiritual cures after experiencing a healing of Marie Bailly that he could not explain.[27] The Catholic journal Le nouvelliste reported that she named him as the prime witness of her cure. Alexis Carrel refused to discount a supernatural explanation and steadfastly reiterated his beliefs, even writing a book describing his experience,[28] though it was not published until four years after his death. This was a detriment to his career and reputation among his fellow doctors, and feeling he had no future in academic medicine in France, he emigrated to Canada with the intention of farming and raising cattle. After a brief period, he accepted an appointment at the University of Chicago[12] and two years later at the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research.


of course he ends up at University of Chicago then Rockefeller institute...

according to this he really did push the "religious miracle" angle

stories like this would warp the worldview of religious people who keep hearing them, and in turn warp the world's view of religious people (which seems to be important to the Neitzcheites)


	...Carrell advocated, in part, that mankind could better itself by following the guidance of an elite group of intellectuals, and by incorporating eugenics into the social framework. He argued for an aristocracy springing from individuals of potential, writing:

    	We must single out the children who are endowed with high potentialities, and develop them as completely as possible. And in this manner give to the nation a non-hereditary aristocracy. Such children may be found in all classes of society, although distinguished men appear more frequently in distinguished families than in others. The descendants of the founders of American civilization may still possess the ancestral qualities. These qualities are generally hidden under the cloak of degeneration. But this degeneration is often superficial. It comes chiefly from education, idleness, lack of responsibility and moral discipline. The sons of very rich men, like those of criminals, should be removed while still infants from their natural surroundings. Thus separated from their family, they could manifest their hereditary strength. In the aristocratic families of Europe there are also individuals of great vitality. The issue of the Crusaders is by no means extinct. The laws of genetics indicate the probability that the legendary audacity and love of adventure can appear again in the lineage of the feudal lords. It is possible also that the offspring of the great criminals who had imagination, courage, and judgment, of the heroes of the French or Russian Revolutions, of the high-handed business men who live among us, might be excellent building stones for an enterprising minority. As we know, criminality is not hereditary if not united with feeble-mindedness or other mental or cerebral defects. High potentialities are rarely encountered in the sons of honest, intelligent, hard-working men who have had ill luck in their careers, who have failed in business or have muddled along all their lives in inferior positions. Or among peasants living on the same spot for centuries. However, from such people sometimes spring artists, poets, adventurers, saints. A brilliantly gifted and well-known New York family came from peasants who cultivated their farm in the south of France from the time of Charlemagne to that of Napoleon.[30]


Carrel wrote that people from certian families should be taken and developed for "high potentialities." Names "descendants of founders of American civilization," "very rich" and "aristocratic families of Europe", "feudal lords," "great criminals who had imagination," "heroes of French or Russian Revolutions", "high-handed business men", who might have "hereditary strength" for "legendary audacity and love of adventure". I think he says people with this potential should be taken from families and raised as "building stones for an enterprising minority." Says such "high potentialities" rarely encountered among peasants and "honest, intelligent, hard-working men" who had bad luck in careers or in "inferior postitions."

sounds like he's proposing breeding a community of ubermench psycopaths? 


also wrote about gassing "undesirables" and "All forms of the proletariat must be suppressed."


also got a Nobel Prize in 1912


------


influences on Lindbergh:


Carrel

Henry Ford

Goering

Lawrence Dennis? (named by Larnder)

mistresses? https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/northamerica/usa/1491010/Aviator-Lindbergh-fathered-children-by-three-mistresses.html

the press hounding him


his father's ideas on bankers and British plots


this?


http://www.charleslindbergh.com/americanfirst/speech.asp
	... England has devoted, and will continue to devote every effort to get us into the war. We know that she spent huge sums of money in this country during the last war in order to involve us. Englishmen have written books about the cleverness of its use.

	... Tolerance is a virtue that depends upon peace and strength. History shows that it cannot survive war and devastations. A few far-sighted Jewish people realize this and stand opposed to intervention. But the majority still do not.


this speech was in 1941



------


here's his 1939 article in Reader's Digest:


http://library.flawlesslogic.com/lindy.htm
	for eventually the laws of nature determine the success of human effort and measure the value of human inventions in that divinely complicated, mathematically unpredictable, development of life at which Science has given the name of Evolution.

	Aviation seems almost a gift from heaven to those Western nations who were already the leaders of their era, strengthening their leadership, their confidence, their dominance over other peoples. It is a tool specially shaped for Western hands, a scientific art which others only copy in a mediocre fashion, another barrier between the teeming millions of Asia and the Grecian inheritance of Europe -- one of those priceless possessions which permit the White race to live at all in a pressing sea of Yellow, Black, and Brown.


Lindbergh a social darwinist white supremicist


goes on about danger of decline from "spiritual mediocrity" and from being too dependent on technology I guess


	...A great industrial nation may conquer the world in the span of a single life, but its Achilles' heel is time. Its children, what of them? The second and third generations, of what numbers and stuff will they be? How long can men thrive between walls of brick, walking on asphalt pavements, breathing the fumes of coal and of oil, growing, working, dying, with hardly a thought of wind, and sky, and fields of grain, seeing only machine-made beauty, the mineral-like quality of life. This is our modern danger -- one of the waxen wings of flight. It may cause our civilization to fall unless we act quickly to counteract it, unless we realize that human character is more important than efficiency, that education consists of more than the mere accumulation of knowledge.


I guess he's worried being fat and lazy and dependent on technology is going to pollute the gene pool


	But the other great danger is more easily recognized, because it has occurred again and again through history. It is the ember of war, fanned by every new military weapon, flaming today as it has never flamed before. It is the old internal struggle among a dominant people for power; blind, insatiable, suicidal. Western nations are again at war, a war likely to be more prostrating than any in the past, a war in which the White race is bound to lose, and the others bound to gain, a war which may easily lead our civilization through more Dark Ages if it survives at all.


apparently Lindbergh sees a competetition between races, with white race "dominant," but is apparently worried that this dominence "threatened" by coming war in Europe and wants his readers to be worried too.

goes on saying air power will be a key factor in coming war (this was after he inspected Luftwaffe)


next paragraph says he wishes there was a scientific wy to measure "changing character of men" and "They form the unseen strength of an army, the genius of a people."


	...Likewise, in judging aviation, in its effect on modern nations, no satisfactory measurement of strength exists. It is bound to geography, environment, and racial character so closely


Lindbergh was sent to size-up air-power of nations

thought air-power depended on "racial character?"


sounds like scientific racism which I guess was big in the 20's and 30's


book on rise of Naziesque ideologies in U.S.: 

https://books.google.com/books?id=q4T0yyIqx_4C&pg=PA460&lpg=PA460

another book that touches on this with interestin tidbits (like that Lindbergh kidnapping spurred Hitler's gov to make kidnapping punishable by death, although not sure how interesting that is considering Lindbergh case got plastered on newspapers worldwide) https://books.google.com/books?id=JkXJZtI9DQoC&pg=PA127&lpg=PA127&dq=Harry+Laughlin+Lindbergh&source=bl&ots=3Bk9F3AwQT&sig=DQj6Rp13bA7phhRdGhGszWCGBZg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiTnfbdoJ3aAhUwhuAKHdRfC_IQ6AEIUzAG#v=onepage&q=Harry%20Laughlin%20Lindbergh&f=false


https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2621292/
	Both believed that through this work they could ultimately defeat death and ensure the individual's immortality. Being staunch eugenicists, the men also held that these medical breakthroughs should be restricted for use by the “white race.” As Carrel put it, and Lindbergh concurred, “There is no escaping the fact that men are not created equal, as democracy, invented in the 18th century — when there was no science to refute it — would have us believe.” Carrel went on to offer that the human race is pushed forward by “the elite.” He felt it unfortunate that “we don't yet understand the genesis of great men. Perhaps it would be effective to kill off the worst [of us] and keep the best, as we do in the breeding of dogs.”


http://www.uapress.ua.edu/product/Question-of-Character,1056.aspx
	In A Question of Character, Cathy Boeckmann establishes a strong link between racial questions and the development of literary traditions at the end of the 19th century in America. This period saw the rise of "scientific racism," which claimed that the races were distinguished not solely by exterior appearance but also by a set of inherited character traits. As Boeckmann explains, this emphasis on character meant that race was not only a thematic concern in the literature of the period but also a generic or formal one as well.

	Boeckmann explores the intersections between race and literary history by tracing the language of character through both scientific and literary writing. Nineteenth-century pseudo-sciences such as phrenology and physiognomy had a vocabulary for discussing racial character that overlapped conceptually with the conventions for portraying race in literature. Through close readings of novels by Thomas Dixon, Mark Twain, William Dean Howells, Charles Chesnutt, and James Weldon Johnson—each of which deals with a black character "passing" as white—Boeckmann shows how this emphasis on character relates to the shift from romantic and sentimental fiction to realism. Because each of these genres had very specific conventions regarding the representation of character, genres often dictated how races could be depicted.


where did Lindbergh pick up the term "racial character"?

apparently used in multiple places in scientific racism literature: https://archive.org/stream/RacialContours1965/ISHERWOODH.B.-Racial_Contours_1965_djvu.txt


Laughlin, contemporary with Lindbergh, used the term:

https://the-eye.eu/public/concen.org/Conspiracy%20Theory%20eBooks%20Collection%20part%202%20%5BPDF%5D-OMNiSCiENT/Black%2C%20Edwin%20-%20War%20against%20the%20Weak%2C%20Eugenics%20and%20America%27s%20Campaign%20to%20Create%20a%20Master%20Race%202nd%20%282012%29.pdf
	On  February  17,  1924,  just  after  Laughlin  returned,  Davis  in  his
	capacity as secretary oflabor also advocated Laughlin’s ideas in a special
	editorial  in  the 
	New  York  Times.
	  Davis  declared  that  the  program
	suggested by Laughlin must be enacted “so that America may not be a
	conglomeration of racial groups ... but a homogenous race striving for
	the fulfillment of the ideals upon which this Government was founded.”
	52

	On March 8, Laughlin again testified before Johnson’s immigration
	committee,  this  time  presenting  a  massive  table-  and  chart-bedecked
	report  bearing  the  charged  title  “Europe  as  An  Emigrant-Exporting
	Continent and the United States as an Immigrant-Receiving Nation.” True
	to  form,  Laughlin  declared  the  existence  of  an  “American  Race.”  He
	admitted that America was created by “a transplanted people,” but that
	the “nation was established by its founders. The pioneers ‘got in on the
	ground floor. ‘“ As such, this new American race “is a race of white
	people.” Therefore, he summarized, the nation’s racial character “is being
	modified  to  some  degree  by  the  changed  racial  character  of  the
	immigration of the last two generations.”


he presented a bunch of charts to House Immigration Committee chairman Albert Johnson who agreed with him and helped him

there was also a "Eugenics Committee of the United States of America"

Lindbergh at least met JOhnson and posed with picture of him: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lindbergh_Receives_Langley_Medal.jpg

goes on page 103 saying Laughlin recruited Carrel for some special eugenics committee (and this was before he won the nobel prize). This is only mention of Carrel in the book. Book doesn't have "Lindbergh" anywhere in search.

author also wrote book on IBM helping holocaust (seems like this doesn't get as much publicity is it should?)


"father of eugenics" Francis Galton also used term: https://books.google.com/books?id=NB2edERtfiAC&pg=PA352&lpg=PA352&dq=Francis+Galton+%22racial+character%22&source=bl&ots=raVoSNLR2m&sig=YqUXBIR9rwA7fi6S1dAs6NurdWY&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiA8LSus53aAhVJ3IMKHYgFDakQ6AEILjAB#v=onepage&q=Francis%20Galton%20%22racial%20character%22&f=false


not sure where Lindbergh picked it up, but sounds like he read-up on scientific racism



back to reader's digest article:


http://library.flawlesslogic.com/lindy.htm
	Mountains, coastlines, great distances, ground fortifications, all those safeguards of past generations, lose their old significance as man takes to his wings. The English Channel, the snow-capped Alps, the expanses of Russia, are now looked on from a different height. The forces of Hannibal, Drake and Napoleon moved at best with the horses' gallop or the speed of wind on sail. Now, aviation brings a new concept of time and distance to the affairs of men. It demands adaptability to change, places a premium on quickness of thought and speed of action.

	Military strength has become more dynamic and less tangible. A new alignment of power has taken place, and there is no adequate peacetime measure for its effect on the influence of nations. There seems no way to agree on the rights it brings to some and takes from others. The rights of men within a nation are readjusted in each generation by laws of inheritance -- land changes hands as decades pass, fortunes are taxed from one generation to the next; ownership is no more permanent than life. But among nations themselves there is no similar provision to reward virility and penalize decay, no way to reapportion the world's wealth as tides of human character ebb and flow -- except by the strength of armies. In the last analysis, military strength is measurable only by its own expenditure, by the prostration of one contender while the other can still stagger on the field -- and all about the wolves of lesser stature abide their time to spring on both the warriors. 


muses on social darwin theories and says the only social darwinism between nations is war, but "war has changed"

but also is saying that "wolves of lesser stature" take advantage of war between what Lindbergh apparently sees as wolves of greater stature. Next paragraph is:


	We, the heirs of European culture, are on the verge of a disastrous war, a war within our own family of nations, a war which will reduce the strength and destroy the treasures of the White race, a war which may even lead to the end of our civilization. And while we stand poised for battle, Oriental guns are turning westward, Asia presses towards us on the Russian border, all foreign races stir restlessly. It is time to turn from our quarrels and to build our White ramparts again. This alliance with foreign races means nothing but death to us. It is our turn to guard our heritage from Mongol and Persian and Moor, before we become engulfed in a limitless foreign sea. Our civilization depends on a united strength among ourselves; on strength too great for foreign armies to challenge; on a Western Wall of race and arms which can hold back either a Genghis Khan or the infiltration of inferior blood; on an English fleet, a German air force, a French army, an American nation, standing together as guardians of our common heritage, sharing strength, dividing influence. 


doomsaying about disasterous war which he thinks will destroy the white race while "inferior blood" will take advantage. Apparently sees non-whites as "foreign races" threatening white "heritage."

also predicted WW2 here but that might have been predictable (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lebensraum) (where did he get this idea?)


	Our civilization depends on peace among Western nations, and therefore on united strength, for Peace is a virgin who dare not show her face without Strength, her father, for protection. We can have peace and security only so long as we band together to preserve that most priceless possession, our inheritance of European blood, only so long as we guard ourselves against attack by foreign armies and dilution by foreign races.

	We need peace to let our best men live to work out those more subtle, but equally dangerous, problems brought by this new environment in which we dwell, to give us time to turn this materialistic trend, to stop prostrating ourselves before this modern idol of mechanical efficiency, to find means of combining freedom, spirit, and beauty with industrial life -- a peace which will bring character, strength, and security back to Western peoples.

	With all the world around our borders, let us not commit racial suicide by internal conflict. We must learn from Athens and Sparta, before all of Greece is lost. 


Lindbergh thinks that european nations should not go to war in order to stop "racial suicide" and "dillution by foreign races."

apparently referring to "oriental guns" and "ghenkis kahn" taking over from "dominence" of european civilization

7-8 years earlier was doing relief work in China, raising awareness to help flood and Chaing Kai-Sheck telling everybody about meeting Lindbergh like he was proud


other idea in here is calling to "stop prostrating oursselves before idol of mechanical efficiency," but not sure how that relates to rest of essay

earlier in essay said "A great industrial nation may conquer the world in the span of a single life, but its Achilles' heel is time. Its children, what of them?"

iirc he inspected luftwaffe and thought they were superior

Nazis thought there "wunderwaffe's" were superior too and I guess proud of it: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wunderwaffe

is he writing this for Nazis? like could say to Nazis: "hey Nazis I know your war machines are better, but doesn't starting a war in europe go against your ideas of white supremecy?" although seems like Lindbergh actually believes these ideas


https://www.upi.com/Archives/1984/11/04/Lindberghs-spy-missions-in-Germany/8186468392400/
	SAN FRANCISCO -- Charles A. Lindbergh, often branded as a Nazi sympathizer during World War II, gathered intelligence for the United States on four visits to Germany before the war, according to papers of the pre-war U.S. military attache in Berlin.

	The late Col. Truman Smith, who was America's military representative in Berlin between 1935 and 1939, disclosed in papers recently published by the Hoover Institution that Lindbergh provided crucial and detailed data on the Luftwaffe's planes and Hitler's aircraft manufacturing facilities.

	As for the highly publicized incident in which Nazi Field Marshal Hermann Goering presented Lindbergh with a medal in 1938, the papers disclose that neither Smith nor Lindbergh had any advance knowledge of Goering's plan.

	Robert Hessen, who edited the Smith papers, said even if they had been alerted 'Lindbergh would not have been able to refuse the medal without offending.' Smith and Lindbergh did not want to offend Goering at that time because they needed his favor 'if they wanted to see more of the German Air Force.'

	Another reason Lindbergh did not want to annoy Goering, Smith's papers said, was that he hoped to persuade Goering 'that German Jews who were emigrating should not be forced to leave penniless.'


according to this, Lindbergh of the mind of spying on Nazi military strength and persuading them


	...Many American politicians and commentators, such as columnist Walter Winchell, accused Lindbergh of exaggerating Germany's military power in order to frighten the Allies into believing the Luftwaffe was invincible. Because of his deep distaste for publicity of any kind, he never tried publicly to clear himself of the pro-Nazi charges during the war.


Lindbergh also exaggerated luftwaffe strength and told everybody about it


	...Lindbergh actually made four visits to Germany. At the end of at least two of them he helped Smith write detailed reports for G-2 military intelligence in Washington. These reports described aircraft not shown to any other foreigners and factories and airfields from which all other American, French and English visitors were banned.

	Lindbergh was allowed to inspect in detail new and experimental German warplanes such as the Junkers 52 bomber and the Messerschmidt 109 fighter plane, and even allowed to fly some of them, Smith writes. The data supplied by Lindbergh on these aircraft and installations proved to be extremely accurate.

	Smith wrote that Lindbergh not only collected important data for U.S. intelligence but made it possible for the American air attache in Berlin, a trained intelligence officer, to visit numerous bases and factories that were otherwise off limits.


Lindbergh's intel on Nazis was apparently valuable. Did he think so too at the time? Did he think is relationship with them was valuable?


comes off as genuine white supremecist and genuinely wanting to avoid war in Europe, and maybe thought of using his influence and publishing these things as a way to do it, basically peaceful coexistance with Nazi Germany


here's a hunch: someone told Lindbergh he could be a key player in stopping war between Nazi Germany and the rest of Europe, and Lindbergh, being arrogant and knowing he's world famous, bought it. Meetings with Goring, getting a medal and not wanting to "offend them" by returning it point to this. This would be a way to channel Lindbergh wanting to be hero who stops war into making him look like a pro-German full Nazi.


this says the reader's digest article was part of Lindbergh's work for the "America First" committee:

https://books.google.com/books?id=hfaRAP0UsJ8C&pg=PA239&lpg=PA239&dq=Lothrop+Stoddard++Charles+Lindbergh&source=bl&ots=bm9hgN4LI2&sig=OY5-FSuRgmZ3Eu2wU3PD_yDuJKs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi8p9iDpJ3aAhWl1IMKHY55BGMQ6AEITzAM#v=onepage&q=Lothrop%20Stoddard%20%20Charles%20Lindbergh&f=false

goes on to say Reader's Digest owner William Randolph Hearst met with Hiter and "used his publications to present fascist Germany to his readers in a positive light."


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=hfaRAP0UsJ8C&pg=PA239&lpg=PA239&dq=Lothrop+Stoddard++Charles+Lindbergh&source=bl&ots=bm9hgN4LI2&sig=OY5-FSuRgmZ3Eu2wU3PD_yDuJKs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi8p9iDpJ3aAhWl1IMKHY55BGMQ6AEITzAM#v=onepage&q=Lothrop%20Stoddard%20%20Charles%20Lindbergh&f=false
	...Lindbergh's contribution reflected many of the prevailing orthodoxies among leading eugenicists on both sides of the Atlantic. His emphasis on the need to prevent the "White race" from being overwhelmed by "inferior blood," for instance, is quite consistent with the writings of Lothrop Stoddard. Edwin Black describes Stoddard's Rising Tide of Color against White Supremecy as a "eugenic gospel." First published in 1926, this volume is said to have influenced the policies of Adolf Hitler. During his tour of Germany's Eugeinc Courts in 1939, Stoddard actually met with Hitler. In words that echo the ethnocentric alarmism of Lindbergh, Stoddard asserted: "If white civilization goes down, the white race is irretrievably ruined. It will be swamped by the triumphant colored races, who will obliterate the white man by elimination or absorption ... Just as we isolate bacterial invasions, and starve out bacteria, so we can compel an infrio race to remain in its native habitat."


Lindbergh read Stoddard? they say similar things, but author doesn't mention Lindbergh saying he read him

author goes on to mention Ford's connection with agents from Tsarist Russia

guessing author suspects Lindbergh read Stoddard based on honest effort to find out who influenced him


here is quote from his book from 1921:

https://books.google.com/books?id=G0TiAAAAMAAJ&pg=PA303&lpg=PA303

predicts some cataclysm that could end "white civilization"

	...Well, perhaps our change of heart may come sooner than now appears. The horrors of the war, the disappointment of the peace, the terror of Bolshevism, and the rising tide of color have knocked a good deal of the nonsense out of us, and have given multitudes a hunger for realities who were before content with a diet of phrases.


that Stoddard said this interesting

rise of Soviets was like replacing rule of the world by white sociopaths with rule of the world by sociopaths of all races

meanwhile same group comes up with bullshit theories to get rest of the world fighting each other based on race


	...What are the things we *must* do promptly if we would avert the worst? This "irreducible minimum" runs about as follows:

	First and foremost, the wretched Versailles business will have to be thoroughly revised. As it stands, dragon's teath have been sown over both Eruope and Asia, and unless they be plucked up they will presently grow a crop of cataclysms which will seal the white world's doom.


goes on doomsaying about "gigantic race war" between Asia and Europe (didn't Soviet agents try to start that?)


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lothrop_Stoddard

Stodard harvard grad, Ph.D. in History


	...Stoddard blasted the ethnic supremacism of the Germans and blamed the "Teutonic imperialists" for the outbreak of World War I.[12] He opposed what he saw as the disuniting of white European peoples through intense nationalism and infighting.[citation needed]

	Some of the predictions that Stoddard made in The Rising Tide of Color were accurate, though not all of them were original to him or predicated on white supremacy. They include Japan's rise as a major power; a war between Japan and the US; a second war in Europe; the overthrowing of European colonial empires in Africa and Asia; the mass migration of non-white peoples to white countries; and the rise of extremist Islamism as a rival to Western civilization because of religious radicalism. (Stoddard was anti-Islamic and would publish the book The New World of Islam in 1921.)[13][14]


championed "whites should stick together and not fight" narrative and predicted a bunch of geopolitical events


	...The Nazi Party's chief racial theorist Alfred Rosenberg got the racial term Untermensch from the German version of Stoddard's 1922 book The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man. The German title was Der Kulturumsturz: Die Drohung des Untermenschen (1925).[22]

	Between 1939 and 1940, Stoddard spent four months as a journalist for the North American Newspaper Alliance in Nazi Germany. He got preferential treatment by Nazi officials compared to other journalists. An example was the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda's insisting that NBC's Max Jordan and CBS's William Shirer use Stoddard to interview the captain of the Bremen.[23][24]


	...After World War II, Stoddard's theories were deemed too closely aligned with those of the Nazis and so he suffered a large drop in popularity.[26] His death from cancer in 1950 went almost entirely unreported despite his previously broad readership and influence.[27]


this guy is really sketchy

one of the agentura?

had a lot of influence:

https://books.google.com/books?id=Mbl8AgAAQBAJ&pg=PT109&lpg=PT109&dq=%22Lothrop+Stoddard%22+tanaka+memorial&source=bl&ots=fItoQHK_rg&sig=gr1vu4kCRLMKzt9CNoJ4PjA_zvQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj2w7W3x53aAhXr7oMKHXkdDZ4Q6AEIKTAA#v=onepage&q=%22Lothrop%20Stoddard%22%20tanaka%20memorial&f=false
	Race and cultural awareness played an increasingly important part in shaping the views of future American military leaders; and it seems that this common cultural outlook and collective self-confidence contributed mightly to the effectiveness of the US Navy in subsequent decades. Between the wars, each class at the NWC recieved thirteen lectures on the 'scientific' subject of race and from 1922-37 Lothrop Stodard was the leading expert on the subject. From 1931-7, he lectured annually on 'Racial Aspirations as the Foundation of National Policy'. In 1935, one third of the books reviewed at the NWC were about Japan. One sixth were about the control of raw materials and the remainder were about race and Social-Darwinism.


Lindbergh was in touch with some U.S. military leaders, though not sure if specifically NWC


------


read this:


https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2621292/

	...After World War II, Lindbergh remained unapologetic for his war-time stance. Friedman points out that Lindbergh's Wartime Journals (1970) “contained passages that seemed indifferent to the regimented brutality of Hitler's Nazi Germany, and some passages that seemed clearly anti-Semitic.”



old pamphlet saying Lindbergh had become witting or unwitting agent of Nazi with examples:

http://jfk.hood.edu/Collection/Weisberg%20Subject%20Index%20Files/L%20Disk/Lindbergh%20A%20Nazi%20Is/Item%2001.pdf



https://books.google.com/books?id=gxigDQAAQBAJ&pg=PT79&lpg=PT79
	According to the excellent The American Axis: Henry Ford, Charles Lindbergh and the Rise of the Third Reich (99), Max Wallace wrote:

	[Now] under the increasing influence of his mentor, Lindbergh appeared to be embracing the newly discovered psuedo-science that Carrel espoused, and the righteous dogmatism behind it. "It should now be branded on our consciousness that unless science is controlled by a greater moral force, it will become the Antichrist prophesized by early Christians."

	Continuing on this track, years later, Lindbergh would write "We must help the strong; only the elite make the progress of the masses possible." By the late 1930s, "Lindy" would openly express the fear that a white Christian Europe would be swallowed up by the "Asiatic" east. In a controversial article in Reader's Digest in 1939, months before Nazi tanks rolled into Poland, he xpounded more fully on his theory

	...Predictably the aviator developed a long-lasting friendship with fascist-leaning industrialist Henry Ford. When quizzed by the special agent-in-charge of the FBI's Detroit field office on just what he and Lindbergh discussed when the aviator dropped by his pant, Ford answered, "When Charles comes out here, we only discuss the Jews."






------


http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4269380/Charles-Lindbergh-s-wife-knew-affairs.html

Lindbergh controversy continues 2001 through March 1, 2017...


(why?)



------


https://www.today.com/popculture/book-lindbergh-had-children-europe-wbna8088935
	 At the heart of the book are selections from letters kept by Brigitte Hesshaimer, who died in 2001. The letters were written in English.

	The tone of the letters is often reserved — like Lindbergh himself. His marriage to writer Anne Morrow Lindbergh lasted until his death in Hawaii at age 72, but in the later part of his life he spent much of his time roaming the United States and the globe as a businessman and adviser to the U.S. government. 

	... The book says Lindbergh used a post office box in Connecticut to get letters from Hesshaimer and wrote to her at her home in Germany. His farewell letter was sent with no return address; like other letters, it is signed only with his first initial.

	The subject matter of the letters is often veiled, including one said to be Lindbergh’s response to news from Brigitte that she was pregnant with Dyrk. “The news you send is wonderful, and I am tremendously happy about it,” the letter reads. “I just wish I could be there with you now, instead of writing this letter...”

	Turmoil over his relationships with the two other women, the book notes, was elusively described as “various problems.”

	“There are bound to be hurt feelings, as there have been,” the same 1958 letter reads.

	Schroeck writes that for an outsider, the letter “would be completely incomprehensible. His relationship with Brigitte, Marietta and Valeska could only be suspected by someone who already knew about it.” 


where did he pick that up?


------


http://www.jstor.org/stable/41209799?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

excerpt from Lindbergh's diary before and after Hitler preparing to invade Checkoslovokia



http://www.historynet.com/britain-france-not-appeased-hitler-1938.htm

sounds like Lindbergh was wrong

this says Britain and France could have stopped Hitler at Sudeten crisis--Britain was not ready for war, but neither was Germany

taking Checoslovakia helped them build-up arms faster


http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/education/resources/chamberlain-and-hitler/source-3/

General Ismay said aborbing Checkoslovakia gave Germany advantage in land forces but bought England and France time to build air defenses


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hastings_Ismay,_1st_Baron_Ismay Also selected by and worked closely with Churchill and oversaw partition of India

did he favor anti-aircraft guns from the ground over fighters?

ordered digging trenches in London during talks at Munich (fear of war them apparently rubbed-off on Lindbergh)

"optimistic" about post-war relations with Russia

NY Times applauded his appointment to head NATO



http://spartacus-educational.com/Clivenden_Set.htm

Lindbergh met with sketchy group influencing British foreign policy to let hitler expand and told them Luftwaffe really strong


http://spartacus-educational.com/SSchristie.htm


also says a coup was planned against Hitler (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oster_conspiracy) if Britain joined forces with Chekoslovokia against Hitler and the British gov and chamberlain knew this before the munich agreements


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_Canaris

this guy said to be involved with the coup, but impression from wiki article is he probably wanted germany to fight and lose european war

what did Canaris and others like him (if read him right) think of the coup?

maybe operation valkery used as a way to kill good guys in nazi regime, not sure about Oster plot


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ewald_von_Kleist-Schmenzin

this guy also went to Britain to tell them about opposition in German high command to Hitler if invaded Checkoslovakia and British supported. Was executed later in operation valkerie.


telling according to "journalists" in 1938:


https://archive.org/stream/theybetrayedczec00georuoft/theybetrayedczec00georuoft_djvu.txt
	AUTHOR'S NOTE 

	This book is the work of a journaUst, and not of 
	an historian. History will later pass judgment on 
	the occurrences of October 1938. All the state- 
	ments contained in this book are based upon trust- 
	worthy reports and documents. The texts of the 
	letters have been taken from the English White 
	Paper. 

	...The Generals left in silence. Even the most loyal 
	of them were filled with apprehension. They knew 
	better than anyone how long Germany could wage a 
	war and who would have to bear the whole blame if 
	the war were lost. 

	Was there perhaps some truth in the rumours 
	current in Paris and London that the Generals would 
	arrest Hitler if he ventured on war ? 


...


https://www.quora.com/Why-did-France-and-Britain-give-Sudetenland-to-Germany-in-Munich-Agreement

Sudetenland voted to join germany after WWI but Hitler just wanted to take all of Chekoslovakia

Lord Halifax meeting with Nazis important? told them "just do whatever in central/eastern europe" basically. Was Hitler confident he could take Chekoslovakia unopposed and why?

in this also says soviets had a deal to defend Czecholovakia if French did, weren't at meeting but French were. Why did France cave in when they had Soviet backing?

wikipedia says polish ambassador to France was adamant about not letting Soviets pass and Daladier deffered to Chamberlain, but short on details.

other sources say Chekoslovak army was good, so they basically let them get defeated without a shot.


https://sputniknews.com/analysis/201709291057809731-munich-agreement-uk-france-italy-nazi/

Russian propaganda on Munich agreement with Jabara Carley, seems to play blame games and downplay unusualness of French and English decisions


wikipedia emphasizes that Hitler was probably going to start a war over Checkoslovokia anyway. Believable, but if Chamberlain and Daladier operating on that assumption, why let Hitler get stronger first? Had a major opportunity to oppose with Czech, French, English, and Soviet army, oppose internally with Oster coup.

Ismay's excuse was apparently that British wasn't prepared to face Luftwaffe, in line with what Lindbergh was saying.

wikipedia says Daladier had already figured Hitler for wanting to take over Europe like Napoleon--what was his excuse?


https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0618.html?ei=5006&en=bd6a539da5d79a00&ex=1088308800&partner=ALTAVISTA1

Daladier suspicious--in with Comunists, gave up at Munich, declared war on Germany later but didn't do anything in war expect built maginot line, played up "super-Maginot myth" telling French public there were defenses in Belgium when their weren't any and so German Blitzkreig broke through fast and shocked public too

might be a dupe

weird that he called out Hitler as trying to take over Europe but appeased him anyway. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89douard_Daladier Daladier seems to have done a lot wrong 


this says Stalin prepared to back up French and British a week before Stalin-Hitler pact, but French and British leadership rejected: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/3223834/Stalin-planned-to-send-a-million-troops-to-stop-Hitler-if-Britain-and-France-agreed-pact.html


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoney_War
	At the Nuremberg Trials, German military commander Alfred Jodl said that "if we did not collapse already in the year 1939 that was due only to the fact that during the Polish campaign, the approximately 110 French and British divisions in the West were held completely inactive against the 23 German divisions."[16] General Siegfried Westphal stated that if the French had attacked in force in September 1939 the German army "could only have held out for one or two weeks."[17]


what's up with that?


http://www.historynet.com/operation-saar-a-lost-opportunity-september-99-world-war-ii-feature.htm
	The day the French army marched into Germany, the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) landed in France. Although the British military was not quite ready to take on the Wehrmacht, British leaders were eager for some sort of action. Winston Churchill, then head of the British Admiralty, proposed floating mines down the Rhine River. The French, however, protested that the Germans would retaliate and blast the Seine River bridges. In the British House of Commons there was equal hesitancy to aggressively conduct the war. When it was suggested that the Black Forest be bombed to create uncontrollable fires in Germany, British Secretary of State for Air Sir Kingsley Wood protested on the grounds that such attacks would be perpetrated against private property. Additionally, French Premier Eduard Daladier requested that the British Royal Air Force (RAF) refrain from bombing Germany. It was fast becoming a gentlemen’s war, with the Germans operating as such out of operational necessity and the French out of timidity.

	Unlike the mass-produced machines of the Luftwaffe, French aircraft were virtually hand assembled and in short supply, though they were still formidable in the hands of experienced pilots. The French air force was prohibited from flying missions into Germany despite its capabilities. Had French military leaders realized that the Luftwaffe was wholly involved in the east, the Anglo-French air effort might have been more aggressive. In the west, the Luftwaffe was limited to a few antiquated fighters, many of which were biplanes. The bulk of Messerschmitt Me-109 fighters available were based in the north, protecting the industrial Ruhr and naval facilities. The greatest amount of aerial activity during the period, which came to be known as the “Phony War,” was conducted by Germans flying reconnaissance missions.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89douard_Daladier
	In October 1938, Daladier opened secret talks with the Americans on how to bypass American neutrality laws and allow the French to buy American aircraft to make up for productivity deficiencies in the French aircraft industry.[5] Daladier commented in October 1938, "If I had three or four thousand aircraft, Munich would never have happened," and he was most anxious to buy American war planes as the only way to strengthen the French Air Force.[6] A major problem in the Franco-American talks was how the French were to pay for the American planes, as well as how to bypass the American neutrality acts[7]


fear of Luftwaffe played role in reasons cited for English and French leadership decisionmaking in letting Hitler take over europe

Lindbergh opposing lend-lease a problem too, would have helped solve the problem of Luftwaffe strength that Lindbergh identified in the first place

des moines speech was in Sep 1941, between Hitler invasion of Russia and pearl harbor https://www.historyonthenet.com/world-war-2-timeline-2/ guess Lindbergh thought letting Germany and Russia fight alone better?

http://spartacus-educational.com/USAlindbergh.htm
	Lindbergh argued that "Europe, and the entire world, is fortunate that a Nazi Germany lies, at present, between Communistic Russia and a demoralized France. With the extremes of government which now exist, it is more desirable than ever to keep any one of them from sweeping over Europe. But if the choice must be made it can not be Communism." Lindbergh believed that the Germans were "especially anxious to maintain a friendly relationship with England" and that they had no "intention of attacking France for many years to come, if at all," and they seemed "to have a sincere desire for friendly relations with the United States, but of course that is much less vital to them."

	...Lindbergh argued strongly that "a westward expansion by Hitler might still be prevented through a combination of diplomacy, strategic convenience, and the use of defensive power." Lindbergh's worst fear was that "the potentially gigantic power of America, guided by uninformed and impractical idealism, might crusade into Europe to destroy Hitler without realizing that Hitler's destruction would lay Europe open to the rape, loot, and barbarism of Soviet Russia's forces, causing possibly the fatal wounding of Western civilization." He added "it seemed to me essential to France and England, and even to America, that Germany be maintained as a bulwark against the Soviet Union." 


apparently what he really believed was this:

	
	...In 1941 Henry Ford showed his commitment to the America First Committee, by employing as a member of his executive staff. This caused great controversy when on 17th December, 1941, ten days after Pearl Harbour, Lindbergh made a speech where he argued: "There is only one danger in the world-that is the yellow danger. China and Japan are really bound together against the white race. There could only have been one efficient weapon against this alliance.... Germany.... the ideal setup would have been to have had Germany take over Poland and Russia, in collaboration with the British, as a bloc against the yellow people and Bolshevism. But instead, the British and the fools in Washington had to interfere. The British envied the Germans and wanted to rule the world forever. Britain is the real cause of all the trouble in the world today."


but that doesn't make sense since Japan and China fighting bitterly at that time


this is source on pg 10, but seems iffy: https://ia600407.us.archive.org/12/items/CharlesLindberghFBI/Charles%20Lindbergh%2005.pdf


if Lindbergh really wanted to stop Soviets from taking over Europe, wouldn't it have made more sense to crush hitler there while fighting in Russia? like to D-Day earlier. operation overlord delayed for weird reasons and iirc Churchill helped with that. Push through Italy also got delayed https://www.warhistoryonline.com/world-war-ii/top-7-allied-mistakes-in-european-during-wwii.html. U.S. presumably tied up somewhat fighting Japan and Churchill wanted to attack Italy first which happened through North Africa (though landing at Italy might have been better idea than landing at France to end war quickly?) (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Roundup_(1942) this says Churchill opposed U.S. generals pushing for early invasion of Europe during Russian campaign and wanted to attack in mediterranian instead, with wikipedia giving some bs-sounding reasons)

they did do a half-assed attempt to open second front in 1942: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dieppe_Raid  http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a491502.pdf  It failed, hurt allied morale and maybe used as excuse not to try again until 1944? (not sure about this) (this says it was used as an excuse: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Sledgehammer)


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Torch
	Operation Torch (initially called Operation Gymnast) was the British-United States invasion of French North Africa during the North African Campaign of the Second World War which started on 8 November 1942. It is the first major operation that US troops undertook in the European / North African theatre of World War II.[4]

	The Soviet Union had pressed the US and British to start operations in Europe and open a second front to reduce the pressure of German forces on the Soviet troops. While US commanders favored Operation Sledgehammer, landing in Occupied Europe as soon as possible, British commanders believed that such a course was likely to end in disaster.[5] Landings in French North Africa were instead proposed.


once at Checkoslovakia, again at Poland, then after operation barbarossa--three strikes you're out? seems like Lindbergh was always on the wrong side of this too.

after operation barbarossa, probably best solution would have been to team up soviets, U.S., british and all come down on Hitler hard ASAP

allied leadership solution was to piddle around at Dieppe and north africa while giving soviets aid so they could fight Nazis on their own then take over half of Europe

Lindbergh solution was to give Soviets no aid and let them loose to Nazis or fight and exhaust each other


Japan played similar role to Germany in asia, but allies didn't stop Soviets there either


------

overestimating Luftwaffe played role in excuses for appeasing Germany


https://books.google.com/books?id=Hb_CAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT277&dq=Lindbergh+luftwaffe+Goring&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi7s8vhzqvaAhVj5oMKHX0gA9IQ6AEIKzAA#v=onepage&q=Lindbergh%20luftwaffe%20Goring&f=false
	Lindbergh: A Biography

	By Leonard Mosley

	...He searched around desparately for a way of preventing the catastrophe which he now envisioned. It was at this moment that Joseph Kennedy, the American envoy in London, came to his aid. Kennedy, as strongly convinced as Lindbergh that Germany was insuperable and determined to keep Britain out of war even if it meant giving in to the Nazis, sawin Lindbergh's prestige a way to influence the British Government toward a policy of appeasement. He summoned Lindbergh to the embassy and asked him to asses for him the exact nature and strenght of the Luftwaffe.

	It was a moment when Prime Minister Chamberlain had begun personal negotiations with Adolf Hitler to avoid a war. He had been to Berchtesgaden to argue with the Fuhrer, and was due to continue the discussion at Bad Godesberg on September 22. On the evening of September 21, Kennedy asked Lindbergh to put his views in writing. When Chamberlain left for Bad Godesberg on September 22, he had a summar of Lindbergh's views with him, and they were devestating. For Lindbergh had written as follows:

	September 22, 1938

	Dear Ambassador Kennedy:

	This letter is to confirm and clarify the statements I made to you yesterday in regard to military aviation in Europe.

	Without doubt the German air fleet is now stronger than that of any other country in the world. The rate of progress of German military aviation during the last several years is without parallel. I feel certain that German air strength is greater than that of all other European countires combined, and that she is constantly increasing her margin of leadership. I believe that German factories are capable of producing in the vicinity of 20,000 aircraft each year. Her actual production is difficult to estimate. The most reliable reports I have obtained vary from 500 to 800 planes per month. . . .

	I do not believe civilization eve faced a greater crisis.


https://books.google.com/books?id=fw6ZlJtxz2QC&pg=PA154
	Berlin Alert: The Memoirs and Reports of Truman Smith
	edited by Robert Hessen

	...from 500 to 800 planes per month. The quality of German design is excellent, and the extensive research facilities which have been built in that country are a gurantee of continued progress in the future. The Germans long ago established their ability in the design, construction, and operation of aircraft. I believe they have the greatest ability in any European nation in the field of aviation. In fact, I believe that the United States is the only country in the world capable of competing with Germany in aviation. At present, however, Germany is rapidly cutting down the lead we have held in the past. In numbers of fighting planes she is already ahead of us. In time of war, her weakness would undoubtedly lie in her supply of raw materials.

	I do not believe civilization ever faced a greater crisis.


https://books.google.com/books?id=Hb_CAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT277
	Germany now has the means of destroying London, Paris, and Prague if she wishes to do so. England and France together have not enough modern war planes for effective defense or counter-attack. France is in a pitiful condition in the air. England is better off, but her air fleet is not comparable with Germany's....Czechoslovakia has no completely modern aircraft except those obtained from Russia....Judging by the general conditions in Russia, I would not place great confidence in the Russian air fleet...

	It seems to me essential to avoid a general European war in the near future at almost any cost.


https://books.google.com/books?id=fw6ZlJtxz2QC&pg=PA154
	...France is in a pitiful condition in the air. England is better off, but her air fleet is not comparable with Germany's. France is probably now building in the vicinity of 50 planes per month; England in the vicinity of 200 first-line aircraft. I understand that France hopes to have about 2,500 first-line planes by the spring of 1940.

	Czechoslovakia has no completely modern aircraft, except those obtained from Russia. I saw a number of Russian-built bombers on the field at Prague. The Czechoslovakians have excellent machine guns and anti-aircraft guns.

	It is not possible to estimate the Russian air strength. The Russians have copied American factories and purchased American machinery of the most modern type. If operated on American standards these factories might place Russia next to Germany in military aviation. The production is certainly much less on Russian standards. Judging by the general conditions in Russia, I would not place great confidence in the Russian air fleet. However, Russia probably has a sufficient number of planes to make her weight felt in any war she enters. Her aircraft are not the best, but their performance is good enough to be effective in modern warfare. I believe the Russian weakness lies in inefficiency and poor organization.


https://books.google.com/books?id=Hb_CAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT277
	It seems to me essential to avoid a general European war in the near future at almost any cost. I believe that a war now might easily result in the loss of European civilization. I am by no means convinced that England and France could win a war against Germany at the present time, but, whether they win or lose, all of the participating countries would probably be prostrated by their efforts. A general European war would, I believe, result in something akin to Communism running over Europe and, judging by Russia, anything seems preferable.

	I am convinced that it is wiser to permit Germany's eastward expansion than to throw England and France, unprepared, into war at this time.

	We must recognize the fact that the Germans are a great and able people. Their military strength now makes them inseparable from the welfare of European civilization, for they have the power either to preserve or destroy it. For the first time in history, a nation has the power either to save or to ruin the great cities of Europe. Germany has such a preponderance of war planes that she can bomb any city in Europe with comparatively little resistance. England and France are too weak in the air to protect themselves.

	Yours sincerely,
	Charles A. Lindbergh


	It should perhaps be emphasized once more that most of the assertions contained in this letter were untrue, and that Charles Lindbergh had been tricked into grossly overblowing the power of the Luftwaffe. But that was something which Neville Chamberlain did not realize. Confronted by an intransigent Adolf Hitler, terrified that if he did not give way to the Nazis over their demands on Czechoslovakia all Lindbergh's dire predictions of Teutonic fire and brimstone would come true, he became convinced that surrender was the only possible choice. He persuaded the French Prime Minister, Edouard Daladier, to act likewise. And at Munich on September 29, 1938, Britain and France sacrificed their Czechoslovakian ally and kissed the Soviet Union good-by as a potential ally.

	It was quite a victor for the German Air Force considering the fact that it had not even needed to get airborne.



https://books.google.com/books?id=Ocs3DwAAQBAJ&pg=PT76&dq=Lindbergh+luftwaffe+Goring&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi7s8vhzqvaAhVj5oMKHX0gA9IQ6AEIPTAD#v=onepage&q=Lindbergh%20luftwaffe%20Goring&f=false
	Strategic Denial and Deception: The Twenty-First Century Challenge
	edited by James Wirtz

	...The other noteworthy instance of German disinformation was directed agaisnt American and, indeed, world opinion. The unwitting instrument was Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh who, beginning in 1936 made three trips to Germany at the request of American military intelligence. Lindbergh was brought in by U.S. military attache Truman Smith specifically to ferret out better intelligence on the Luftwaffe. On its part, the Luftwaffe, from Goring and milch and Udet down, were charming hosts. Literally charming, for Lindbergh accepted their false production figures, future plans that were never fulfilled and their pretense that the Luftwaffe was already, in 1936, the world's most powerful air force. After his second visit to the Reich, in October 1937, Lindbergh reported that the Luftwaffe had a vast air fleet of 10,000 (of which 5,000 were serviceable bombers) and was building between 500 and 800 planes per month (with a capability of 20,000 per year); statistics that, he pointed out, made the Luftwaffe "stronger than that of all other European countries combined." The truth was that the Luftwaffe then totaled only 3,315 aircraft (of which only 1,246 were serviceable bombers). During the Munich crisis, the Luftwaffe was actually able to mobilize only 1,230 first-line aircraft (including 600 bombers and 400 fighters). Production was, in fact, far below 300 planes per month. But Linderbergh's misinformation circulated on the even of Munich throughout the United States, Britain, and France, where it was accepted credulously by such persons as French Air Minister Guy la Chambre, French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet and U.S. Ambassador to Britain Joseph P. Kennedy. When British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain flew to Germany the week before Munich, he carried a summary of Lindbergh's report. Two weeks after Munich a grateful Goring presented Lindbergh with the Service Cross of the German Eagle.


Wirtz and Mosley give a different impression from Lindbergh's actual letter

Lindbergh basically saying don't start a war with just European (specifically France, England and Chzekoslovakia) against Germany, but implies that with Russia or the U.S. they could take them. Says that if there's a European only war Europe gets flattened and then communism can take over.

This is what ended up happening, but Lindbergh says to build up military and let Germany "expand eastward," although her "weakness would undoubtedly lie in supply of raw materials."

maybe of the mind of containing Germany in west and letting Russia and Germany vie for Eastern Europe, but I think all that ended up doing is giving Germany more raw materials for war machine for later invasion of Western Europe.


the right thing to do in response to Lindbergh's letter would probably have been to check his reports of Luftwaffe strength and try to get Russia and U.S. (and Poland) on board to back Czheckoslovakia, but apparently that didn't happen.


allies also let Hitler basically fight and take over one country at a time instead of getting European countries and Russia to all gang-up on him at once. Instead it was each taking their turn 1v1 with Hitler like goons in an action movie. Happened with Chekoslovakia, Austria, Poland, France kindof? , and Russia although they gave a lot of arms and aid to Russia.


------

https://www.millersville.edu/holocon/files/The%20Buildup%20of%20the%20German%20War%20Economy.pdf

Hitler got some raw materials from Soviet Union after Stalin-Hitler pact

getting natural resources said to be important goal for Hitler and Nazis weakness


https://history.stackexchange.com/questions/26314/where-did-germany-get-their-oil-during-ww2

got resources from territories they took, not sure how important Czechoslovakia was in that respect


interesting that Stalin's thinking appeared to be mirror of Lindbergh's: Lindbergh says let Germany expand east while buying their planes, Stalin says let Germany expand West (and really everywhere but Soviet territory) and helps supply their war machine.

If Lindbergh really wanted a war between Germany and Russia would be pretty evil, maybe of propaganda value for Soviet decisionmakers and help them feel better about it. Stalin-Hitler pact sometimes framed as reaction to Munich agreement and used in tu quoque arguments, and Lindbergh basically argued for Munich agreement saying Russia bigger threat.


if they got everyone of the mind of playing football with Hitler in proxy war between Soviets and the West would tend toward the phenomenon seen where they never ended up attacking Hitler at the same time early on and letting him take over europe, with the game stacked in the favor of the Soviets since they had agents everywhere.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Lindbergh
	In late 1940 Lindbergh became spokesman of the non-interventionist America First Committee,[136] soon speaking to overflow crowds at Madison Square Garden and Chicago's Soldier Field, with millions listening by radio. He argued that America had no business attacking Germany; he later wrote:

	    I was deeply concerned that the potentially gigantic power of America, guided by uninformed and impractical idealism, might crusade into Europe to destroy Hitler without realizing that Hitler's destruction would lay Europe open to the rape, loot and barbarism of Soviet Russia's forces, causing possibly the fatal wounding of western civilization.[137]

	In his 1941 testimony before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs opposing the Lend-Lease bill, Lindbergh proposed that the United States negotiate a neutrality pact with Germany.[138] 


http://www.charleslindbergh.com/pdf/lindbergh2.pdf
	Though he thought that America should be militarily prepared for a war with Germany, Lindbergh never saw the Germans as a major threat.  Before World War II, he thought that it was highly unlikely that Germany would attack Britain or France,91



this is the opposite of what Lindbergh said around Munich and in his 1939 reader's digest article though

seems like more bullshit written about Lindbergh than most people

they are obsessed with him


	and even after the outbreak of war, he argued that America had little to fear from Hitler’s forces.92  Rather, he feared Joseph Stalin’s Soviet Union, which had, in Lindbergh’s opinion, a culture and political system which would, if given the chance, radically alter Western civilization.  He thought that war with the Soviets was inevitable,93 and his

		greatest hope lay in the possibility that a war would be confined to fighting between Hitler and Stalin.  It seemed probable that Germany would be victorious in such a conflict; and by that time France and England would be stronger.  Under any circumstances, I believed that a victory by Germany’s European people would be preferable to one by Russia’s semi-Asiatic Soviet Union.  Hitler would not live forever, and I felt sure the Germans would eventually moderate the excesses of his Nazi regime.94

	As such, Lindbergh’s second suggested way of preventing Germany from going to war with America was for the U.S. to improve its diplomatic relations with the Third Reich.  Such a move would not only would prevent Germany and America from fighting, but it would also limit Soviet expansion.  In October 1938, he readily accepted an invitation from U.S. Ambassador to Germany Hugh Wilson to a dinner party at the American embassy, at which Lindbergh and Field Marshal Herman Göring were to be the guests of honour.  Wilson hosted the dinner in an attempt to improve American-German relations, a turn of events which seemed possible after the Munich Conference two weeks earlier, at which France and Britain opted for a policy of appeasement.95  At the dinner, without the permission of Wilson, Göring presented Lindbergh with a medal, on behalf of Adolf Hitler. 


same quote framed in another book:

https://books.google.com/books?id=JI3mAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA101&lpg=PA101
	But in mid-1939, Lindbergh's vindication still lay two years in the future. At the time, he was coming under increasing fire for supposedly exaggerating the Luftwaffe's strength in order to scare Germany's potential enemies into appeasing Hitler. It was a ludicrous charge, in that Lindbergh's primary goal in shuttling between Paris and London in 1938, then sharing his conclusions with U.S. military and civilian aviation people, was to convince all three nations to strengthen their air power as a deterrent against German war plans.

	Both Britain and France needed to buy time with the Germans while they rebuilt their aviation infrastructure. Charles worried that they had neither the time nor the will, especially the French. Writing later about his views at the time, Lindbergh observed:

		Tensions, especially in eastern Europe, had increased to a point where the outbreak of war seemed probably. My greatest hope lay in the possibility that a war would be confined to fighting between Hitler and Stalin. It seemed probable that Germany would be victorious in such a conflict; and by that time France and England would be stronger. Under the circumstances, I believed that a victory by Germany's European peoples would be preferable to one by Russia's semi-Asiatic Soviet Union. Hitler would not live forever, and I felt sure the Germans would eventually moderate the excess of his Nazi regime.

	Although Lindbergh's hope that the war would be limited to Germany and the Soviet Union was unfulfilled, he was far from the only American to wish for that outcome. Especially after Germany invaded Russia in June 1941, a good many people hoped the two dictatorshiups would crush one another and leave Western Europe alone. Among these was Missouri senator and future U.S. vice president and president Harry Truman, who told reporters, "If we see that Germany is winning we ought to help Russia, and if Russia is winning we ought to help Germany, and that way we let them kill as many as possible."

	Truman biography David McCullough explains the future president's thinking on the topic: "[L]ike many Americans and many in Congress, Truman saw little difference between the totalitarianism of Fascist Germany and Communist Russia, and particularly since the Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939 and Russia's invasion of tiny Finland. Stalin was only getting what he had coming to him was the feeling and one shared by a very large segment of the American people."


if western leaders actually believed this it would have led to not crushing Hitler after operation barbarossa and Stalin taking over europe

whole problem with this thinking is equating leader of country with the country and people itself: it wasn't Stalin getting punished by the invasion, it was the Soviet people. Except the time he had a panick attack when his officers knocked on his door, Stalin was sitting pretty while the German and Soviet people were getting slaughtered.



https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/98/09/27/specials/lindbergh-lost.html
	Meditating on the war in a letter to William Jovanovich, his publisher, which is printed in the introduction to the book, Mr. Lindbergh writes.

	"Your ask what my conclusions are, rereading my journals and looking back on World War II from the vantage point of quarter century in time? We won the war in a military sense; but in a broader sense it seems to me we lost it, for our Western civilization is less respected and secure than it was before.

	"In order to defeat Germany and Japan we supported the still greater menaces of Russia and China - which now confront us in a nuclear weapon era. The British empire has broken down with great suffering, bloodshed and confusion. France has had to give up her major colonies and turn to a mild dictatorship herself."

	"Much of our Western culture was destroyed. We lost the genetic heredity formed through eons of many million lives. Meanwhile, the Soviets have dropped their Iron Curtain to screen off Eastern Europe, and an antagonistic Chinese Government threatens us in Asia.

	"More than a generation after the war's end, our occupying armies still must occupy, and the world has not been made safe for democracy and freedom. On the contrary, our own system democratic government is being challenged by that greatest of dangers to any government - internal coordinating and unrest.

	"It is alarmingly possible that World War II marks the beginning of our Western civilization's breakdown..."

	Mr Lindbergh kept his journal for eight years - from 1937 to mid-1945 - as a private record "in (the) realization that I was taking part in one of the great crises in world history." 


get impression that Lindbergh had right idea of opposing Soviet plot to take over Europe and asia with WWII with wrong way to go about it, while using racist logic throughout



------


http://www.jstor.org/stable/41209799?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

sep 21 1938

	...Lunch with Ambassador and Mrs. Kennedy....Talked with Ambassador Kennedy for an hour after lunch. We discussed the crisis and the aviation and general military situation in Europe. Everyone in embassy is extremely worried. Hitler is apparently ready to invade Czechoslovakia and has his divisions on the border. Hitler told Chamberalin [according to Kennedy] that he (Hitler) would risk a world war if necessary. Kennedy says England is ready to fight, even though not prepared. Chamberlain realizes the disastrous effects of war with Germany at this time and is making every effort to avoid one. English opinion (Kennedy) is pushing him toward war.





------

at Sudeten crisis Lindbergh of the mind of stopping war at any cost, thinks allies can buy planes from Germany


http://www.charleslindbergh.com/americanfirst/speech3.asp