https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/former-trump-adviser-admits-to-2015-communication-with-russian-spy/2017/04/04/a09d7384-193b-11e7-9887-1a5314b56a08_story.html
    Page said he assisted U.S. prosecutors in their case against Evgeny Buryakov, an undercover Kremlin agent then posing as a bank executive in New York. Buryakov was convicted of espionage and released from federal prison last week, a few months short of completing a 30-month sentence. Buryakov agreed to be immediately deported to Russia.

    In a written exchange with The Washington Post, Page confirmed playing a role in the case but declined to discuss details.

    The complaint includes transcripts from 2013 of wiretapped conversations among the Russians discussing their efforts to recruit Male 1, identified as a New York energy trader whom the Russians described as willing to talk.

    In his statement, Page compared the revelation of his role to “the politically-motivated unmasking standards seen in the Obama Administration which have recently been exposed.”



https://www.cnn.com/2017/04/18/politics/fbi-dossier-carter-page-donald-trump-russia-investigation/index.html
	Washington (CNN)The FBI last year used a dossier of allegations of Russian ties to Donald Trump's campaign as part of the justification to win approval to secretly monitor a Trump associate, according to US officials briefed on the investigation.

	The dossier has also been cited by FBI Director James Comey in some of his briefings to members of Congress in recent weeks, as one of the sources of information the bureau has used to bolster its investigation, according to US officials briefed on the probe.

	This includes approval from the secret court that oversees the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) to monitor the communications of Carter Page, two of the officials said. Last year, Page was identified by the Trump campaign as an adviser on national security.

	Officials familiar with the process say even if the application to monitor Page included information from the dossier, it would only be after the FBI had corroborated the information through its own investigation. The officials would not say what or how much was corroborated.


https://www.cnn.com/2017/04/18/politics/fbi-dossier-carter-page-donald-trump-russia-investigation/index.html
	The dossier first came to light when CNN reported that a summary of it had been presented to President Obama and President-elect Trump back in December by top US Intelligence officials.

	Comey's briefings to lawmakers stand in contrast to efforts in recent months by the bureau and US intelligence agencies to try to distance themselves from the dossier.


https://www.cnn.com/2017/04/18/politics/fbi-dossier-carter-page-donald-trump-russia-investigation/index.html
	...The dossier alleges that Page met senior Russian officials as an emissary of the Trump campaign, and discussed quid-pro-quo deals relating to sanctions, business opportunities and Russia's interference in the election. Page has denied meeting the officials named in the dossier and says he never cut any political deals with the Kremlin.




------



https://www.npr.org/2017/12/19/571726696/senior-fbi-official-mccabe-to-face-closed-door-grilling-from-house-lawmakers
	McCabe, the No. 2 official at the FBI, walked straight into those headwinds in his interview with the House intelligence panel, where members likely focused on what Republicans charge is anti-Trump political prejudice.

	Topping that list is the question of Peter Strzok, a senior FBI agent who played a significant role in the Russia investigation as well as the bureau's probe of Hillary Clinton's use of a private email server while she was secretary of state. Strzok was removed from Mueller's inquiry after it emerged that he had exchanged politically charged text messages with an FBI lawyer that disparaged Trump.

	In one text, Strzok referred to Trump as an "idiot." In another, he said Clinton should win the election "100 million to zero." But some Republicans have focused on another message that they suggest signals something more sinister than political bias.

	At a House Judiciary Committee hearing on Dec. 13, Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, cited a reference to a conversation that may have taken place in McCabe's office.

	In the text, which was provided to Congress by the Justice Department, Strzok says: "I want to believe the path you threw out for consideration at Andy's office — that there's no way he [Trump] gets elected — but I'm afraid we can't take that risk. It's like an insurance policy in the unlikely event you die before you're 40 ..."

	Jordan said that's evidence that the people at the FBI and Justice having conversations "in Andy's office" — McCabe's — have it in for Trump.


these passages cited refer to Trump's odds of winning the election, something that would be very relevant and maybe stressful for agents working on the Clinton email investigation.


from the hill:

http://thehill.com/policy/national-security/365729-fbi-deputy-grilled-by-house-intel-amid-concerns-over-bias
	“I want to believe the path you threw out for consideration in Andy’s office - that there’s no way he gets elected - but I’m afraid we can’t take that risk,” Strzok texted on Aug. 15 of last year, including what is believed to be a reference to McCabe. “It’s like an insurance policy in the unlikely event you die before you’re 40.”

	Some reporting has since suggested that Strzok was urging a thorough pursuit of the agency’s investigation of the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia, underway since July.


this says Strzok was talking about Trump investigation



https://www.npr.org/2017/12/19/571726696/senior-fbi-official-mccabe-to-face-closed-door-grilling-from-house-lawmakers
	...Lawmakers on Tuesday also likely grilled McCabe on the so-called Trump dossier, which was compiled by a former British intelligence officer at the behest of a Washington-based strategic research firm called Fusion GPS. Hillary Clinton's campaign helped pay for the dossier as opposition research on Trump.

	Republicans want to know whether the FBI used the dossier to launch its investigation into Russian interference in last year's election. Mueller took over that probe when he was named special counsel in May.

	Republicans allege that if the Russia investigation is founded upon a Democratic-funded dossier, then the whole inquiry is politically motivated.

	Then-FBI Director James Comey told Congress earlier this year that the bureau's counterintelligence investigation into the Trump camp began in July of 2016, but he did not detail what spurred it.



http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2017/12/20/mccabe-draws-blank-on-democrats-funding-trump-dossier-new-subpoenas-planned.html
	Investigators say McCabe recounted to the panel how hard the FBI had worked to verify the contents of the anti-Trump “dossier” and stood by its credibility. But when pressed to identify what in the salacious document the bureau had actually corroborated, the sources said, McCabe cited only the fact that Trump campaign adviser Carter Page had traveled to Moscow. Beyond that, investigators said, McCabe could not even say that the bureau had verified the dossier’s allegations about the specific meetings Page supposedly held in Moscow.


McCabe "stood by credibility" of dossier?


	...Ohr will retain his OCDETF title but was stripped of his higher post and ousted from his office on the fourth floor of “Main Justice.” Department officials confirmed that Ohr had withheld from superiors his secret meetings in 2016 with Christopher Steele, the former British spy who authored the dossier with input from Russian sources; and with Glenn Simpson, the founder of Fusion GPS, the opposition research firm that hired Steele with funds supplied by the Hillary Clinton campaign and the Democratic National Committee.

	Subsequently, Fox News disclosed that Ohr’s wife Nellie, an academic expert on Russia, had worked for Fusion GPS through the summer and fall of 2016.



https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/dec/19/andrew-mccabe-grilled-house-republicans-russia-med/
	In a related development, members of the House Judiciary Committee on Tuesday announced the panel will soon issue subpoenas for testimony from Mr. McCabe, Mr. Strzok, Ms. Page and Bruce Ohr, a DOJ official who allegedly met with creators of the notorious anti-Trump dossier.


investigating something with Ohr, Strzok and Lisa Page


------


https://www.politico.com/interactives/2018/02/01/what-is-in-the-nunes-memo-fbi-released-analysis/
	However, the FISC' s rigor in protecting the rights of Americans, which is reinforced by 90-day renewals of surveillance orders, is necessarily dependent on the government's production to the court of all material and relevant facts. This should include information potentially favorable to the target of the FISA application that is known by the government. In the case of Carter Page, the government had at least four independent opportunities before the FISC to accurately provide an accounting of the relevant facts. However, our findings indicate that, as described below, material and relevant information was omitted.


so I think they are saying they didn't give the court enough evidence to make a fair decision, what they gave was biased toward getting a warrant and based (in part?) on dodgy information.


	...a. Neither the initial application in October 2016, nor any of the renewals, disclose or reference the role of the DNC, Clinton campaign, or any party/campaign in funding Steele's efforts, even though the political origins of the Steele dossier were then known to senior DOJ and FBI officials.


	b. The initial FISA application notes Steele was working for a named U.S. person, but does not name Fusion GPS and principal Glenn Simpson, who was paid by a U.S. law firm (Perkins Coie) representing the DNC (even though it was known by DOJ at the time that political actors were involved with the Steele dossier). The application does not mention Steele was ultimately working on behalf of—and paid by—the DNC and Clinton campaign, or that the FBI had separately authorized payment to Steele for the same information.



says FBI knew Steele working for DNC and Clinton types but didn't tell FISA court


then goes on to trash Steele for going to media (why? I guess trying to make case Steele an unreliable source?)


	...Before and after Steele was terminated as a source, he maintained contact with DOJ via then-Associate Deputy Attorney General Bruce Ohr, a senior DOJ official who worked closely with Deputy Attorneys General Yates and later Rosenstein. Shortly after the election, the FBI began interviewing Ohr, documenting his communications with Steele. For example, in September 2016, Steele admitted to Ohr his feelings against then-candidate Trump when Steele said he "was desperate that Donald Trump not get elected and was passionate about him not being president." This clear evidence of Steele's bias was recorded by Ohr at the time and subsequently in official FBI files—but not reflected in any of the Page FISA applications.


FBI interviewed Ohr on communications with Steele

Fox News also says Ohr "withheld his secret meetings" with Steele

was the FBI investigating that?

Anyway the FBI seems to have known something up with Steele, memo says FBI knew Steele professed bias against Trump, but if the FBI knew something it apparently didn't end up in FISA application


	...During this same time period, Ohr's wife was employed by Fusion GPS to assist in the cultivation of opposition research on Trump. Ohr later provided the FBI with all of his wife's opposition research, paid for by the DNC and Clinton campaign via Fusion GPS. The Ohrs' relationship with Steele and Fusion GPS was inexplicably concealed from the FISC.


Ohr also gave FBI his wife's oppo research on Trump while working for Clinton and Fusion GPS


	...According to the head of the FBI's counterintelligence division, Assistant Director Bill Priestap, corroboration of the Steele dossier was in its "infancy" at the time of the initial Page FISA application. After Steele was terminated, a source validation report conducted by an independent unit within FBI assessed Steele's reporting as only minimally corroborated. Yet, in early January 2017, Director Comey briefed President-elect Trump on a summary of the Steele dossier, even though it was according to his June 2017 testimony—"salacious and unverified."


CNN points out too, weird that FBI didn't buy it but Comey paraded it around everywhere


	...Furthermore, Deputy Director McCabe testified before the Committee in December 2017 that no surveillance warrant would have been sought from the FISC without the Steele dossier information.


Gerstein in annotation says "FBI's defenders" point out that there's " no way the dossier could have provided the bulk of the FBI’s rationale for seeking the warrants."

This true? would guess so--Page working with Russian spies before, recently travelled to Moscow and joined a presidential campaign.

So then why would McCabe say that?


	...The Page FISA application also mentions information regarding fellow Trump campaign advisor George Papadopoulos, but there is no evidence of any cooperation of conspiracy between Page and Papadopoulos. The Papadopoulos information triggered the opening of an FBI counterintelligence investigation in late July 2016 by FBI agent Pete Strzok. 


Gerstein points out that memo is saying Papodapoulus original reason for counterintelligence investigation, not the dossier.



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2018/01/09/what-you-need-to-know-about-christopher-steele-the-fbi-and-the-dossier/?utm_term=.410b35947afb
	[Update: In his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, released on Jan. 9 by Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), Simpson said Steele’s memo was received favorably by the FBI because it tracked with their own intelligence. “My understanding was that they believed Chris at this point — that they believed Chris might be credible because they had other intelligence that indicated the same thing and one of those pieces of intelligence was a human source from inside the Trump organization,” Simpson said, apparently also a reference to Papadopoulos.]


wapo says simpson claimed dossier already partially corraborated by the time he gave it to FBI


	...Graham and Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), chairman of the Judiciary Committee, on Jan. 5 referred Christopher Steele, the author of the “dossier” alleging ties between President Trump and Russia, for a criminal investigation by the Justice Department. The move is an unexpected twist in the saga over the document, which was gossiped about in journalistic circles during the 2016 presidential election until a version was published by BuzzFeed shortly before Trump’s inauguration.


Grahama and Grassley referred Steele for criminal investigation with DOJ Jan 5 2018


http://www.newsweek.com/trump-russia-dossier-steele-investigation-772587
	The author of the infamous Trump-Russia dossier should be investigated by the Justice Department for possibly lying to FBI officials, two top Republican members of the Senate Judiciary Committee claimed in a letter sent to Justice Friday.

	Committee Chairman and Senator Charles Grassley (R-Iowa), along with Senator Lindsey Graham (R-South Carolina), believed there are “inconsistencies” in some of the information former British intelligence officer and penner of the dossier Christopher Steele told authorities.

------

https://www.usnews.com/news/national-news/articles/2018-01-09/ex-british-spy-behind-the-steele-dossier-feared-fbi-was-co-opted-by-trump-supporters
	The former British spy who compiled the now-infamous dossier containing allegations of a conspiracy and lurid behavior by President Donald Trump broke off his contact with FBI agents to whom he brought his findings amid concern that the bureau had been co-opted by Trump supporters.


Steele saying random shit going all over the place



------


http://abcnews.go.com/US/fbi-vets-missing-infamous-dossier-amid-russia-probe/story?id=52309501
	The infamous "dossier" alleging collusion between Donald Trump and the Russian government is filled with inflammatory, uncorroborated and in some cases clearly false claims made by unidentified sources — so much so that a longtime Trump aide mentioned in it filed a pair of lawsuits this week.

	But the unverified nature of the dossier is precisely why the FBI decided to look into the allegations, rather than accept them as evidence, and why the dossier should not be used to undermine what federal authorities have since uncovered, according to law enforcement veterans.

	"There may be 90 percent of that dossier that is a complete bunch of [baloney]," said Bob Anderson, who oversaw counterintelligence cases for the FBI before heading its cyber and criminal branch. "But a piece matches with other potentially credible sources that [FBI agents] have ... so now they’re going to dig a little more."


FBI investigating dossier because unverified


	... In fact, even without the dossier, the U.S. intelligence community was in possession of information warranting an FBI probe.

	"I was aware of intelligence and information about contacts between Russian officials and U.S. persons that raised concerns in my mind about whether or not those individuals were cooperating with the Russians, either in a witting or unwitting fashion, and it served as the basis for the FBI investigation to determine whether such collusion [or] cooperation occurred," former CIA Director John Brennan told the House Judiciary Committee last year.

	For the FBI, the dossier was essentially just another tip.

	"This particular matter was complicated by the fact that the 'main subject' happened to be the Republican nominee for President of the United States," but "we still had an obligation to look at it as part of our effort to protect the Republic from foreign threats," according to Frank Montoya, who spent more than two decades with the FBI and another two years leading U.S. counterintelligence policy under the Director of National Intelligence. 


cites these two people to say they had other info for the Russia investigation besides dossier, "just another tip" and not "roadmap."


	In early July 2016, Steele — described by Montoya as a "proven," "well-regarded" and "known entity" in the intelligence community – approached an FBI associate with a worrisome tale: Sources he was speaking with overseas told him then-presidential candidate Trump maintained a "compromising relationship with the Kremlin," perhaps even to the point where Trump could be blackmailed.


Montoya vouching for Steele?


------


https://www.forbes.com/sites/paulroderickgregory/2018/01/30/did-the-fbi-vouch-for-the-crazy-russian-deal-from-the-steele-dossier/#75faa19f1930
	What we did not know on election day was that the Christopher Steele dossier was bought and paid for by the Clinton Campaign and the DNC, that the dossier itself may have been part and parcel of a Kremlin disinformation campaign, and that a FISA (Federal Intelligence Surveillance) court apparently used one of its most bizarre claims to approve the surveillance of a Trump campaign advisor. We also have learned that the Steele dossier was commissioned by an opposition-research firm—Fusion GPS—that had Russia among its main clients.

	...We can understand if many Trump-haters swallowed the dossier’s tales of improbable business deals and fictitious meetings as related by anonymous informants, but it now appears that the FBI used the dossier to obtain a warrant to surveil a member of Trump’s campaign team from a FISA court judge.


but this article appears to be a part of a Kremlin disinformation campaign


a Kremlin disinformation campaign saying a kremlin disinformation campaign that alleges a kremlin disinformation campaign appears to be part of a kremlin disinformation campaign



------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-steele-dossier-fits-the-kremlin-playbook-1517175564

Hoffman says Steele dossider appears to be part of a kremlin disinformation campaign

says Meuller could be investigating


https://nypost.com/2018/01/18/did-putins-pawns-help-assemble-the-trump-smearing-dossier/
	Glenn Simpson, co-founder of Fusion GPS, which was hired by Hillary Clinton to dig up dirt on Trump, suggested in Senate testimony that there may have been some “overlap” between his work for Hillary and his work for a Russian client lobbying the US on behalf of Vladimir Putin.

	Simpson said that, while he farmed out the dossier to his old pal Steele, he also contributed to the dossier along with a mysterious Russian translator who worked directly with his other client, a Putin crony.


should probably read that testimony...



https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2018/02/01/russia-steele-dossier-democrats-republicans-216921
	As far as is public, however, key claims in the dossier amount to near misses rather than corroborated facts. The dossier notes the contemporaneously reported fact that sometime Trump foreign policy adviser Carter Page traveled to Moscow in July 2016, for example. But it describes him as meeting with different Russians, Igor Sechin and Igor Diveykin, than those he has admitted to meeting, Arkady Dvorkovich and Andrey Baranov. The dossier describes Trump lawyer Michael Cohen cleaning up matters with the Russians in an August meeting in Prague, when he is instead known to have traveled to a different European city, London, in October. Cohen says he was elsewhere in August, and there’s no evidence he traveled to Prague.

	On the key issue of computer hacking, the dossier is particularly weak. Even after Guccifer 2.0, believed to be a persona working on behalf of Russia, started leaking stolen documents, a dossier report stated that any compromising information Russia might leak consisted of “bugged conversations she [Clinton] had on various visits to Russia and intercepted phone calls,” not stolen emails. A report on Russia’s hacking efforts released after WikiLeaks had already dumped emails stolen from the DNC claimed that “a senior government figure reported that [Russia had had] only limited success in penetrating the ‘first tier’ foreign targets … like G7 and NATO governments.” This, in spite of the fact that an April 2015 report revealed that “Russian hackers have ‘owned’ the State Department system for months and it is not clear the hackers have been fully eradicated from the system” and from there had compromised unclassified White House systems. A widely read September 2015 technical report also described Russia’s success targeting Western governments.

	The dossier may be worse than just uncorroborated. In an op-ed this week, former CIA officer Daniel Hoffman wrote that the near misses in the dossier bore the mark of Russian disinformation, “accurate basic facts provided as bait to convince Americans that the fake info is real.” That’s the same intriguing theory floated by the British journalist Ben McIntyre, an expert on intelligence who has described the idea like so: “They set up an ex-MI6 guy, Chris Steele, who is a patsy, effectively, and they feed him some stuff that’s true, and some stuff that isn’t true, and some stuff that is demonstrably wrong.”


on all this stuff wrong with the dossier