

https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=102249839
	Mexican Drug Cartels Recruiting Young Men, Boys

	The epicenter of violence in Mexico remains Ciudad Juarez, where nearly 2,000 people have been murdered in a mafia war in the past 14 months — many of them just boys.

	There are so many murders that the new morgue is planning to double its size, and so many threats that the mayor recently moved his family across the river to El Paso.

	Some 80 percent of the victims are younger than 25. Social workers say the violence is fueled by a disturbing trend: The cartels have begun seeking younger and younger recruits.

	Soto, Daniel, Hector and Gerardo are just the kind of young men the cartels are looking for. They're residents — or, inmates — at the School of Social Betterment for Minors on the outskirts of Juarez. This is where the city sends its bad boys — the young killers, robbers, thugs and drug dealers.

	"Sicaritos are children who are assassins, 13 or 14 years old," says Soto. "[The cartels] give them a weapon to use. It's easier for a boy. If he's older, he thinks too much — he may think about the consequences. But when you're young, you think you can take on the world."

	Soto, 18, sits at a picnic table at the school. Like the others, he wears a hoodie and sneakers, and grins self-consciously. All four teenagers insist they never joined the cartels. Nonetheless, they all seem to have a thorough knowledge of their workings. Like every other young person in this story, they won't give their last names.

	"To be an assassin, you can't think," says Daniel, 16. "You just do it, grab a pistol and go kill somebody, or whatever. It doesn't matter if you die or not."

	Soto adds, "If you don't have a mother or a father, no one to believe in you, then it's easy to fall into this, to be a delinquent."

	Recruiting Juveniles

	Mexican drug cartels recruit children under 18 for the same reasons that armed forces conscript boy soldiers in Sierra Leone and Somalia — their immaturity produces fearlessness. And for a young boy at the margin of society, cartel membership brings instant respect.

	"You go with the guys who have the most power, money, connections and influence," Soto says.

	Gerardo, 15 and pimply, chimes in, "When you run with those people, nobody says anything, especially not the police, because they're working for your patron, too."


see cartels as only way of advancement for themselves out of poverty, think it brings respect


	Teresa Almada is the longtime director of the youth development center in Juarez called CASA.

	"There are thousands of candidates in this city for recruitment, because of their level of social exclusion," she says. "They're young and poor and disposable."

	The growing number of lawless youth in Juarez is intimately connected to the proliferation of narcotics. Juarez has now replaced Tijuana as Mexico's most drug-addicted city. A crackdown by U.S. and Mexican authorities has choked traditional smuggling routes. Consequently, the cartels have flooded the local market with marijuana, cocaine and heroin. More young people are selling, and using, than ever before.

	Carlos is a freckle-faced heroin addict — 18 years old, though he looks much older. He hangs out with other junkies near the market in central Juarez. With a slurred voice and glassy eyes, Carlos says he came to Juarez last year from Guadalajara with the intention of sneaking into the United States and looking for work, but he couldn't get past the Border Patrol. So he stayed in Juarez where he lives in a grim, abandoned building reeking of human waste. He squeegees car windows and steals to get the money to buy the fixes he needs to shoot up every six hours. 


cracked down on drug routes to U.S. and started selling in Mexico instead


	See 'Potential' In Young Gang Members

	The city's noble-sounding colonias, named for Mexican presidents — Gustavo Diaz Ordaz, Plutarco Elias Calles, Adolfo Lopez Mateos — are the incubators of gangs whose members have become what Almada calls "cannon fodder" for cartel franchises like La Linea, Los Aztecas, and Los Mexicles.

	This prosperous industrial city was supposed to be the economic model of a stable middle class. Migrants from throughout Mexico flocked here to work in the foreign-owned assembly plants. But the city can't accommodate its 1.3 million residents. There aren't nearly enough public schools, parks or youth programs. Children of the barrio are raised by siblings or in the streets, and they're ill-suited to repetitive work in the factories, or classroom study.

	In Juarez, 1 out of 3 kids doesn't go to middle school, and attendance in high school is half the national average.

	Into the void have stepped the cartels.

	"Organized crime figured out the potential of young gang members and started recruiting," says Tony, a 26-year-old former gang member. "They realized that these boys could easily be channeled to do bad things, like homicides and assaults. The government's lack of commitment to young people in Juarez is to blame. These boys wouldn't end up like this if the system provided healthy activities for them."


kids aren't going to school so end up in gangs instead


	Tony works with a youth group called Alta Tropa, or the High Crew, that uses creativity such as graffiti art, break dancing and hip-hop as an alternative to gangbanging.

	Ciudad Juarez finds itself in a perfect storm for the conversion of young men into criminal psychopaths: poverty, insufficient schools, broken homes, a pervasive culture of violence, and the seductive, omnipresent pull of the narco-mafias.

	On this night, a dozen motley members of Alta Tropa have gathered in a ramshackle house as a full moon rises over the desert metropolis. A big boy named Javier in baggy shorts and a backward baseball cap raps, while his homies smile approvingly. Others are silk-screening their designs on T-shirts.

	At least the kids of Alta Tropa are trying to save themselves.


ends up as a recruiting ground for "criminal psychopaths"


------



http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/11/02/AR2009110203492.html
	"It was bullets that killed him, because he was shot in the face and the head," said his mother, Dionisia Villalobos. "But he had little pieces from the grenades all over his body."

	More than the violence, U.S. and Mexican officials and youth advocates said they fear that the rampant criminality is producing a generation that venerates cartel barons and views trafficking as a form of rebellion -- as well as an escape from poverty.

	"What struck me most in the short time that I was in Juarez was not the threat of violence," said Carlos Pascual, the new U.S. ambassador to Mexico. "It was the threat of what occurs if you lose a whole generation."


cartels idiolized by some Mexican youth, seen as form of rebellion and escape from poverty



	To counter the lure of the cartels, the U.S. State Department last month organized a meeting of international youth groups in Mexico City to encourage the use of social networks to oppose violence. The co-founder of Twitter, Jack Dorsey, was mobbed by students asking for advice on how to build online communities to distribute positive messages and counter the cartels' propaganda.


the cartels have propaganda? worth looking into. How did it come to be that cartels became idolized, or got a positive image among Mexican youth?


	In Culiacan, a city in the western state of Sinaloa where many of Mexico's most notorious traffickers grew up, teenagers view the drug bosses as "heroes," said an 18-year-old woman who asked not to be identified. She said teenagers talk openly about the thrill of smuggling, work that can earn them about $500 a trip. 

	"Everyone around here talks about it, especially the kids," she said in an interview. "It's like -- I'm not sure how to describe it -- but they look at it like the ultimate wow." 


Working for cartels seen as cool, drug bosses "heroes"


	... According to Mexican authorities, La Familia, a cartel based in the southwestern state of Michoacan, recruits members as young as 14. The organization inculcates the youngsters with a radical religious doctrine that demands loyalty, a promise to respect women and children -- and a commitment to kill rivals.

	The young gangsters emerge from a grim panorama marked by an absence of government authority. Calderón's wife, Margarita Zavala, said in October that 60 percent of Mexico's children live in poverty.

	"In some parts of this country, it would appear that the only options for children are to immigrate to the United States or become traffickers," said Teresa Almada, director of the Center for the Assistance and Promotion of Children in Juarez.

	In Juarez, where low-wage assembly plants called "maquiladoras" have been mothballed because of the recession, a third of all teenagers neither work nor attend school, according to census figures.

	"These days, youths are joining the drug cartels at an ever-younger age because they're cheap," said Martin Barron Cruz, a researcher at the National Institute of Criminal Science in Mexico. "It is a question of the market. A kid of 15 ends up doing the same job as a 20-year-old, but for half the money."

	"It is easier for the cartels to dispose of them when they are no longer needed," Barron said. "I say 'dispose' because, sadly, there's no other word for it. They eliminate them, often using another kid of the same age."

	Prisoners are also getting younger, Barron said. The largest cohort of inmates is now 19 to 25 years old. 



------


https://www.npr.org/2016/02/15/466491812/narconomics-how-the-drug-cartels-operate-like-wal-mart-and-mcdonalds
	When Tom Wainwright became the Mexico correspondent for The Economist in 2010


Mexico correspondent for "The Economist"


	...Wainwright describes his new book, Narconomics, as a business manual for drug lords — and also a blueprint for how to defeat them. When it comes to battling the cartels, Wainwright says governments might do better to focus on controlled legalization rather than complete eradication of the product.


can this be trusted?

remember what happened with opiod crisis, was caused in part by overprescription of painkillers


	...And while I was in Mexico, the Zetas expanded more quickly than any other cartel. It was extraordinary. Originally they came from the northeast of Mexico, but within a very short space of time, they spread across all of Mexico and in fact down into Central America as well. So I got to thinking about how they'd done this, and when you look at the way that they spread, it seems that what they do is that they go to local areas and they find out who the local criminals are, people who do the drug dealing and extortion and all the other kinds of crime, and they offer them a crime, they say, "OK, you can use our brand, you can call yourself the Zetas, just like us," and they give them, believe it or not, baseball caps with embroidered logos and they give them T-shirts with their logo on and they train them in how to use weapons sometimes, and in return the local criminals give the Zetas a share of all of the money that they get from their criminal activity. 


according to this, Zetas spread by giving out baseball caps


	...So in Switzerland what they found is that by taking those very heavy-using addicts into treatment, they've stopped them from dealing the drug, because now they get their own drug free of charge from their doctors, and because they're no longer out there on the streets dealing the drug, the number of new users has dropped dramatically. So in Switzerland, funnily enough, since they "legalized" heroin in this very, very limited, restricted, controlled way, the number of new users has actually fallen quite a lot and, of course, the illegal supply has dried up almost entirely, because the supply is now run by the government.


reccomends government inject drug dealers with heorin


maybe?

not sure if this guy is legit or is another of those "haha we are going to give you the wrong ideas on how to unfuck what we did" things

leaning toward latter


what's up with Wainwright?


https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-donald-trumps-wall-wont-keep-out-illegal-immigrants-1489165633
	Why Donald Trump’s Wall Won’t Keep Out Illegal Immigrants 
	
	The lure of better jobs in the U.S. will outweigh higher crossing costs, and the wall would mainly serve to enrich people-smugglers 

	By Tom Wainwright


but if the wall raised the cost to get in the U.S. that would keep out a lot of illegal immigrants...

it probably wouldn't do anything at all to keep out people determined to enter the U.S., like drug dealers or terrorists.


	...The going rate for a basic crossing now starts at around $3,000, according to the Mexican Migration Project at Princeton and Guadalajara universities. A business-class service, providing fake documentation to avoid a dangerous slog across the desert, can run to five figures. 

	Crossing the border used to be a relatively easy business that people often did on their own. Today, few migrants attempt it without increasingly expensive help from an ever more professional class of criminal, and the number of migrants has indeed dropped dramatically. 

	But correlations can be deceiving. What has actually produced this decline? Looking back over the past several decades, it is hard to see that the level of border security has made much of an impact. In fact, the main driver of fluctuations in the number of illegal immigrants has been the ups and downs of the U.S. economy. 


or was it propaganda telling them to cross the border?


	...Between 1991 and 2000, Border Patrol enforcement hours increased by some 150%—but there was no fall in illegal migration, according to Pew’s estimates. In fact, the number of people being apprehended at the border each year rose by half, and the total number of Mexican migrants living in the U.S. (most of them illegally) doubled. Making the border tougher did raise the price that undocumented migrants had to pay to cross it—but most of them simply chose to absorb the extra cost.


guess it depends on how much the cost is raised...




------



http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	By the time it finally came out in English, however, Albertini’s traditional diplomatic-chronological approach was falling out of fashion.  The early Cold War saw a surge in Marxist influence on the writing of history, with exciting new work done in social and economic history.  Whether or not they were Marxists, historians of WWI felt the pull, looking into “structural factors” such as the arms race, the alliance system, imperialism and war aims, class interests and domestic factors.  The most influential works of the era were Fritz Fischer’s Griff nach der Weltmacht (literally “Germany’s Grab for World Power”), published in 1961, and A. J. P. Taylor’s War by Timetable (1969).  While Taylor did not go as far as Fischer in pointing to a premeditated German plan for war, he still faulted the Germans owing to the too-strict timetable of their mobilization (the famous “Schlieffen Plan”). 

	The convergence of opinion in this era was well illustrated in Barbara Tuchman’s bestselling popular history The Guns of August (1962).  Curiously, most readers, even today, seem to think this book a chronological narrative of the origins of the war.  In an editor’s note to the latest edition, Doug Grad tells us that the book chronicles “the month leading up to the war and the first month of the war.”  And yet it does nothing of the kind.  After sketching out the war plans of Germany, France, Britain and Russia (though not Austria-Hungary or Serbia), Tuchman skips through the assassination in Sarajevo and entire July crisis in one short paragraph, picking up her story only on August 1!  Nothing could better illustrate the structuralist consensus of the era than this:  a popular book on the origins of the war by a masterful storyteller which leaves out Austria-Hungary, Serbia, and all the diplomatic drama of July 1914.


do marxist theory prefer "structuralist" explanations for why things happen?

like "WWI happened because of the arms race and alliances and interests of the states at the time..." I guess structuralism takes out decisions made by people in explaining events and instead explains them with external factors?

I guess this way of explaining things is a way to hide active measures


https://www.britannica.com/topic/social-structure

https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/help/structur.htm


looks like there's a lot of communist fuckery going on here



------


more on articles by Wainwright:


https://www.1843magazine.com/ideas/the-daily/how-the-internet-is-changing-drug-dealing
	What have these new marketplaces done to the drugs industry? The main impact is on customer service. This has traditionally not been a strength of the narcotics business. “He’s never early, he’s always late. First thing you learn is that you always gotta wait,” complained Lou Reed of his heroin dealer in “I’m Waiting for My Man”. Yet online, you never have to wait. Most vendors offer a range of delivery options, including a premium next-day service for those with real cravings. Repeat customers get discounts. Some vendors offer coupons, or special deals to coincide with holidays. And online drug-dealers are far more courteous than their offline counterparts. Using a messaging system built into the site, I contact a dealer of crystal-meth pipes, “Vicious86”, asking if he can engrave one for a friend; he promptly replies sending his apologies that he does not yet offer such a service, but wishing me luck in finding someone who does.

	There is an economic logic for the superior customer service that buyers receive online.


anything weird going on here? might be that he's selling it up a bit too much... unfortunately, there's only one way to verify what he's saying


	...In some ways the springing up of dark web sites is good news. The system of reviewing drugs, and anonymously testing them, ought to make drug-taking safer. Tests have tended to show that drugs bought online are purer than those bought on the streets. And buying via the web rather than in person means there is less risk of violence. Some criminologists believe that the steep drop in murders in New York in the 1990s was caused partly by drug-dealers starting to use mobile phones and pagers, rather than selling their wares on street corners. The fact that there is no longer any need for dealers to control this “territory” means they no longer go to war over it. The internet could continue this trend.



points out a positive: more drugs, but less violence. Is this true?


	On the other hand, the improved customer service and lower prices offered by online dealers may mean that, other things being equal, more people end up using drugs. That is probably a bad thing for public health. And it is certainly a bad thing for the countries that supply the drugs, which are still provided at source by criminal gangs that use extreme violence. A few online dealers offer what they claim is “fair trade” cocaine. Don’t buy it, in any sense.


he points out a counterexample: the bigger the drug market, the bigger the fight between cartels. "probably a bad thing for public health"

dunno if he's saying anything false on its face, it's just weird. Worded in a weird way.

Tom Wainwright a secret druggie? or something else...


------


https://www.cnn.com/2013/09/02/world/americas/mexico-drug-war-fast-facts/index.html

this says homocide has declined 30% under Nieto

https://www.cnn.com/2016/02/15/world/mexico-drug-graphics/index.html

homocides more than doubled 2007-2011, then dropped from 20k to 15k around 2015


http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/3/17/drug-traffickingasmallpartofmexicancartelsincome.html

cartels "diversifying," Knights Templar cartel doing iron ore selling, extortion, human traficking, selling body parts

	...Former President Felipe Calderon warned against such a stranglehold when he first sent troops to Michoacán in late 2006 to fight La Familia, the predecessor of the Knights Templar. He said the cartel was trying to infiltrate all levels of society. By the time La Familia morphed into the Knights Templar in 2010, it seemed to control the entire state, including politicians and police who failed to act.


"infiltrate all levels of society" like an espionage organization, competing with government for power

	...That contrasts with traditional drug-trafficking cartels, which generate jobs and wealth for local people, buying loyalty and protection. The classic example is the Sinaloa cartel, the only pure drug-trafficking organization left in Mexico, even with the recent capture of its leader, Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman.


Sinaloa cartel good guys compared to these other ones?

reminds me of Assad and ISIS


------


https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-economists-would-wage-the-war-on-drugs-1455895053
	How Economists Would Wage the War on Drugs

	By Tom Wainwright

	In April, the world’s governments will meet in New York for a special assembly at the United Nations to discuss how to solve the drug problem. Don’t hold your breath: Since the previous such gathering nearly two decades ago, the narcotics industry has done better than ever. The number of people using cannabis and cocaine has risen by half since 1998, while the number taking heroin and other opiates has tripled. Illegal drugs are now a $300 billion world-wide business, and the diplomats of the U.N. aren’t any closer to finding a way to stamp them out.

	This failure has a simple reason: Governments continue to treat the drug problem as a battle to be fought, not a market to be tamed. The cartels that run the narcotics business are monstrous, but they face the same dilemmas as ordinary firms—and have the same weaknesses. 


This is Wainwrights big schtick--don't crack down on drugs, but fight cartels "smart" with economic warfare instead, I guess usually involving some form of legalization.

don't all the things governments do to crack down on drugs and cartels (seizing contraband, raiding cartels, arresting dealers and buyers) make drug trafficking risky and expensive in the first place? adding all that effort and risk to sell their "product" *is* a form of economic warfare.

like the allies bombed German manufacturing centers and called it "economic warfare" (or something like that). in the old days they would burn the other guy's crops and salt the earth as a form of economic warfare. So if you come in and burn all the cartel's coca plants, what do you call that?

it would be just like if United Fruit had all their banana crops burned--they have the same weaknesses!


	...Soldiers and police officers have done rather poorly at regulating this complex global business. So what would happen if the war on drugs were waged instead by economists?

	Take cocaine, which presents one of the great economic puzzles of narcotics. The war against cocaine rests on a simple idea: If you restrict its supply, you force up its price, and fewer people will buy it.


Wainwright says this (attack supply to increase price) was basis of war on cocaine


	Andean governments have thus deployed their armies to uproot the coca bushes that provide cocaine’s raw ingredient. Each year, they eradicate coca plants covering an area 14 times the size of Manhattan, depriving the cartels of about half their harvest. But despite the slashing and burning, the price of cocaine in the U.S. has hardly budged, bobbing between $150 and $200 per pure gram for most of the past 20 years. How have the cartels done it?


but the price sold to users didn't change, so it wouldn't translate to fewer drug users


	In part, with a tactic that resembles Wal-Mart’s. The world’s biggest retailer has sometimes seemed similarly immune to the laws of supply and demand, keeping prices low regardless of shortages and surpluses. Wal-Mart’s critics say that it can do this in some markets because its vast size makes it a “monopsony,” or a monopoly buyer. Just as a monopolist can dictate prices to its consumers, who have no one else to buy from, a monopsonist can dictate prices to its suppliers, who have no one else to sell to. If a harvest fails, the argument goes, the cost is borne by the farmers, not Wal-Mart or its customers.

	In the Andes, where coca farmers tend to sell to a single dominant militia, the same thing seems to be happening. Cross-referencing data on coca-bush eradication with local price information shows that, in regions where eradication has created a coca shortage, farmers don’t increase their prices as one might expect. It isn’t that crop eradication is having no effect; the problem is that its cost is forced onto Andean peasants, not drug cartels or their customers.


last sentence is dicey

Wainwright says most growers have only one buyer, who dictate prices, so (I guess?) if some farmers can't produce drug crops profitably the cartels can just buy from whoever can at price they set?


	Even if the price of coca could be raised, it wouldn’t have much effect on cocaine’s street price. The raw leaf needed to make one kilogram of cocaine powder costs about $400 in Colombia; in the U.S., that kilogram retails for around $150,000, once divided into one-gram portions. So even if governments doubled the price of coca leaf, from $400 to $800, cocaine’s retail price would at most rise from $150,000 to $150,400 per kilogram. The price of a $150 gram would go up by 40 cents—not much of a return on the billions invested in destroying crops. Consider trying to raise the price of art by driving up the cost of paint: It would be futile since the cost of the raw material has so little to do with the final price.


but cost of the leaf is small part of cost of final product

maybe cost of transporting over there the greatest? also cost of processing it, paying off everyone involved in cartel stuff, waging war against other cartels

I guess really they'll just sell it for whatever price people will pay--would they be more profitable if they lowered prices? maybe not, it's an addictive drug...

so for the plan of burning all the coca crops to work, you'd have to be really good at burning crops, get all of them


even if price doesn't change, could burning coca crops lead to less cocaine on the market?


	Economics points to a fundamental mistake in the war on drugs. Most of the money spent tackling narcotics is directed toward disrupting supply—by uprooting coca bushes, battling cartels, locking up dealers and so on. In fact, focusing on demand would be more effective.

	Demand for drugs is inelastic—that is, when prices rise, people cut their consumption relatively little. (Given that most banned drugs are addictive, this isn’t surprising.) So even when governments can drive up prices, dealers continue to sell almost as much as they did before—only at higher prices, meaning that the value of the criminal market increases.


if this is true, then why haven't they raised prices already?

	
	Reducing demand, by contrast, triggers a fall in both the amount consumed and the price paid, cutting into the criminal market on two fronts. 

	Demand-side interventions are not only more effective, they’re also considerably cheaper than playing about with helicopters in the Andes. A dollar spent on drug education in U.S. schools cuts cocaine consumption by twice as much as spending that dollar on reducing supply in South America; spending it on treatment for addicts reduces it by 10 times as much. Rehab programs for prescription-painkiller users might seem costly, but they prevent those people from slipping into the colossally more expensive problem of heroin addiction. Where demand cannot be dampened, it can be redirected toward a legal source, as a few U.S. states have done with marijuana—a development that has inflicted bigger losses on the cartels than any supply-disruption policy.


can believe it

Wainwright says more efficient to educate people to stop doing drugs than to blow up and arrest all the drug traffickers


	In any other industry, the current approach to drug control would have been identified as faulty years ago. Despite billions of dollars spent and tens of thousands of lives lost, the business is stronger than ever. Yet the tendency to treat narcotics as a military or policing matter means that the flawed economics behind it seem to go unquestioned. As the U.N. prepares for its special assembly, governments should seek advice not from their generals but from their economists. 


nothing too sketchy about this article

implies legalizing drugs or stopping going after cartels but doesn't outright say it

Wainwright's worldview would seem to legitimize cartels in a way, shifts the blame to the users and the states, which is interesting


is Wainwright right that education can solve the problem?

probably not

I guess would make things better

but these things are true

- everybody is at some point in their life 16-25 years old and not making the best decisions

- everybody goes to college or high school or has an "experimenting" phase

- some people get hooked for life once they try certain drugs


and these factors are more or less immune to education. Like everybody knows drugs are wrong but still can make stupid decisions.

they could still do education better

like they way marijuana education was in 50's and 60's ("reefer madness!") was bad I think, just went over the top in scaring people. And kids being rebellious of course didn't buy it and the campaign had the opposite effect iirc

I think there was another factor that contributed to this, which is different people respond to drugs in different ways. Some people take drugs like a champ. Can start and stop whenever they want. Others are fucked the moment they start. Education didn't explain this very well, just said "as soon as you do drugs you are doomed forever/your soul belongs to satan all is lost etc". So the kids who see the people who can take drugs like a champ see them doing fine and think their teachers are full of shit, and they start doing them too, and the ones who can't take them well and get addicted become addicted for life and are now basically cash cows for the cartels.

only hope for these people would be rehab or them willing themselves out of it


rehab not working well for opioids https://drugabuse.com/library/opiate-relapse/


...

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coca_eradication

wiki article says similar things to Wainwrigt article, I guess they buy the coca leaves from people who grow it for legit reasons ( Aymaras of Altiplano)

I guess could burn everyones coca instead of  Aymaras and they will be drug kingpins of the world

says they use chemicals and biological warfare instead of burning

but they started having GMO coca


	...A March 2005 report by the ONDCP indicated that despite record aerial spraying of over 1,300 km² of coca in Colombia in 2004, the total area under coca cultivation remained "statistically unchanged" at 1,140 km². In response to the report, the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA), an NGO that monitors the impact of US foreign policy in Latin America, observed that the aerial spraying strategy appeared to have hit its limits. According to WOLA, the new ONDCP data suggested a continued "balloon effect" as aggressive spraying in some areas has not deterred new cultivation elsewhere. The WOLA Senior Associate for Drug Policy commented, "The stable cultivation in 2004 throws into doubt US officials’ predictions of a major impact on US drug prices and purity." Regardless, Colombian President Álvaro Uribe vowed to press ahead with the U.S.-financed fumigation of coca crops.[11]


do they seriously just fly in with a plane and spray it?

burn the farms one at a time, each time offer to fund them with another profitable but legal crop, or they get their harvest burned again next time...

cartels could try to respond in kind, then get driven out for burning people's food.


one theory: drug trade continues to exist because U.S. and governments around the world want it to exist? Why is it accepted that the government will always be incompetent? they were "incompetent" with the "reefer madness" campaign too.


...


https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/mar/14/colombia-coca-cocaine-us-drugs
	The soaring coca production comes as Colombia begins implementing a peace accord that calls on the country’s biggest rebel movement to renounce drug trafficking and work with the government to replace coca plants with alternative crops.

	But US officials contend the agreement has also provided a perverse incentive for farmers to grow coca, knowing they would later be awarded subsidies if they agreed to renounce coca and grow products such as potatoes and fruit instead. Cocaine production began increasing in 2013 and has steadily risen every year since, in part also due to a decision to end aerial fumigations in 2014 over health concerns.


missed the "burn their harvest" part?


	...When the US-backed anti-narcotics initiative Plan Colombia began in 1999, Colombia had 123,000 hectares of coca – about one-third less than it did last year. Those figures rose to a high of 170,000 hectares in 2001 and then began to decline. The biggest percentage increase over the last two decades took place in 2015, when coca production rose nearly 42%. But at no point since at least 1994 has coca production been this high.

	Donald Trump has proposed to slash foreign aid by 37%, a cut that the US state department’s top counter-narcotics official, William Brownfield, called “a bit worrying” in an interview with a Colombian newspaper last week.


Trump cutting anti-drug efforts? he can't even tell the truth about that...


	...In Putumayo, a department along Colombia’s border with Ecuador that is one of the country’s top coca producers, farmers said they would be willing to renounce drug production if the government provided a viable alternative. Peasants here signed a pledge to develop legal crops earlier this year, but many doubt they could support their families on food crops alone.

	“We have always been willing to substitute, but the government has promised and deceived us,” said Julio Cesar Jaramillo, a farmer whose three-year-old daughter already knows how to pluck coca leaves from the plant.


this illustrates why pure "economic warfare" as Wainwright puts it wouldn't work. Growing drugs will probably always be more profitable than growing food unless you make it unprofitable


	...“The coca leaf is our sustenance,” said Espinosa, whose lab was one of those recently destroyed. “But it has only brought us exhaustion, notoriety and disillusion. That’s not good for anyone.”



...


https://www.cnn.com/2016/09/22/opinions/war-on-drugs-michael-k-williams/index.html


"war on drugs" a prop? goes back to "why is government always incompetent" puzzle