https://www.politico.com/story/2018/02/24/democratic-memo-gop-fbi-trump-campaign-423446
	The dossier, compiled by former British spy Christopher Steele, wasn't provided to the FBI's counterintelligence team until mid-September 2016, according to the memo. By then, the counterintelligence investigation into Trump's campaign was seven weeks old. "The FBI had already opened sub-inquiries into ... individuals linked to the Trump campaign," according to the findings of the committee's nine Democrats.


already investigating Trump campaign by time memo receieved? but apparently not with FISA


	The Democratic memo, though, reveals that the FBI did inform the judge of Steele's political intentions — that he was "likely looking for information that could be used to discredit" Trump. And FBI officials indicated that Steele himself was not advised that the work he was doing was on behalf of the Clinton campaign.


Steele was the guy in redacted section FBI thought likely looking for info to discredit Trump


	...The memo also reveals that the FBI’s application to spy on Page — and three subsequent renewals — were approved by four different judges, all appointed by Republican presidents.

	In addition, the memo suggests the FBI corroborated elements of Steele’s dossier pertaining to Page when it sought renewals. It also emphasizes that the bureau didn’t rely on the dossier’s most salacious allegations to obtain a warrant to spy on Page.

	The Democratic memo indicates that the FBI’s fact-finding contradicted Page’s testimony to the House Intelligence committee in November about his meetings with Russian officials during the 2016 campaign. The passage on elements of the dossier that may have been corroborated is heavily redacted, but alludes to Page's contacts with Russian officials on his 2016 trips to Moscow.


corraborated some of the dossier info on page?


------

https://www.reddit.com/r/politics/comments/7zzwif/megathread_democrats_release_redacted_memo/durxh05/

what exactly was Page up to?

probably, wasting everybody's time...