on protocols in public:


03 May 1966:


https://www.newspapers.com/image/404294783/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve
	Originaly, "The Protocols" were the unnoticed products of an anti-Semetic movement in France. These documents recieved world-wide attention with their publication in 1903 by Vyacheslav Plehve, minister of the Interrior under Czar Nicholas II of Russia.

	The Protocols were presented by Plehve as the secret minutes of the Zionist Congress of 1897 where the conspiracy to gain control of the world was supposedly outlined. Actually embellished and refined as a forgery by Pleve's own political police department, "The Protocols" were calculated to generate a wave of anti-Semetic propaganda which would divert te restlessness of the Russian working class from forming nonradical labor unions . . .


27 Jan 1941

https://www.newspapers.com/image/384725395/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve
	JUSTICE and the INFORMER

	By PETER LEVINS.

	...On April 19 and 20 accurred the terrible pogrom of Kshenef, in which thousands of Jews, including numerous children, were killed or injured. Pleehve, minister of the interior, was held responsible for he had launched repressive measures against all minorities. He became the Battle Organization's No. 1 candidate for removal.

	The conspirators decided to kill him with bombs, but the plan proved hard to execute. Plehve, who was not uncouscious of his danger, stayed in his palace most of the time, venturing forth only to report to the Czar.

	...That same months, Aseff ha been put under direct orders of chief Ratayeff of the St. Petersburg Ochrana. Ratayeff was a career official of noble brth, not at all like Zubatoff a product of the hard school. Becuase of this, Aseff ad a fairly free hand. Thus he was able to devote his whole attention to the liquidation of Minister Plehve.

	...The Plehve asassination, which of course reverberated throughout the world, raised Aseff to the pinccacle of prestige in the Battle Organization, which became dreaded all over the country. Donations poured in from sympathizers in many lands. That fall (1904) the leaders of the group met in Paris to plan new purges.

	...As Lopuhin had been forced to resign his post following the assassinations of Plehve and the Grand Duke Serge, and as he apparently knew a lot more than he had ever divulged, Burtzeff decided that here might be the solution of the puzzle. Accordingly, he contracted Lopuhin as the latter's train rolled out of Cologne, and talked with him for several hours. The upshot was that the former police head exposed Aseff as a revolutionary who had doubled as a spy for the Ochrana.



https://www.newspapers.com/image/369026323/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve

https://www.newspapers.com/image/354757897/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve


29 Jul 1904

https://www.newspapers.com/image/299727790/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve
	By Associated Press.]

	ST. PETERSBURG, July 28.--Minister of Interior Von Plehve was assassinated 10 o'clock this morning while driving to the Baltic station to visit the emperor of Peterhof Palace. A bomb was thrown under the minister's carriage, completely shattering it, terribly mangling Von Plehve, and killing the coachman and the horses running away. It was said the assassin was a Jew. He was arrested, but declined to give his name.

	..The emperor almost broke down when he was informed of the minister's murder.

	Act Universally Condemned

	Whatever may have been the motive for the crime, nothing but the utmost indignation and condemnation of the assassin's act is voiced everywhere.

	...A wounded man, who is said to be a Jew, was taken to Alexander hospital so dazed as to be unable to speak. His condition is accounted for by the fact that he took poison immediately after throwing the bomb.

	...He was regarded as being in many ways a power behind the throne and was dreaded on account of his control o secret sections of the police and the press of Russia through censors, who it has been understood, did Plehve's bidding without question.

	..He was of great personal power and a born manipulator of men.

	During the whole of his public career he at all times opposed any concessions to a liberal form of government and used all of his energy not only to maintain, but to increase the authority of the government.


https://www.newspapers.com/image/281941490/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve
	30 May 1903

	Correspondent of the London Times Expelled From Russia

	London, May 30--The Times correspondent at St. Petersburg, who has been expelled from Russia, has sent a dispatch via the frontier, explaining his arrest and expulsion by the order of General von Wahle, the assistant minister of the interior, on account of his hostility to the Russian Government and the invention of false news.

	He explains, through the British ambassador, that he was not responsible for the publication of the alleged letter from Minister von Plehve to General von Raaben, the governor of Kishineff, written in anticipation of the Kishineff riots, but the minister said his expulsion was not on account of any individual action, but was due to the general tone of hostility of the Times towards Russia, and the government resolved to teach the Times a lesson.


https://books.google.com/books?id=JMR_VkOUaPgC&pg=PA233&lpg=PA233
	Groups opposed to the government laid the blame for the Kishineff pogrom on the authorities and, in particular, on the minister of the interior, although accusations against V.K. Plehve did not appear in the press; the censorship forbade specific accusations against state officials in print. But they circulated anyway, and appeared openly in foreign newspapers. An alleged confidential letter from Plehve to von Raaben reached the English papers. The letter made reference to the struggle of the Christian population against its enemies, but the letter was a forgery by an unknown hand. The prose, for one thing, is not Plehve's; nor was it Plehve's administrative style to send private letters to subordinates. This would have been especially so in the case of von Raaben, who did not enjoy Plehve's confidence. In any event, documents show that PLehve, having received news of the pogrom from the local authorities, undertook all measures possible under the law to restore order. He also reported to the tsar about his supplementary measures: "Despite the summoning of the military and the arrest of more than  60 rioters, disorders continued. Te governor requested authority to impose measures of strengthened security. I approved his request by telegram."

	Following the pacification of the outbreak, Plehve secured the tsar's agreement to dismiss von Raaben because of his poor handling of the disturbances.



https://www.newspapers.com/image/32631061/?terms=Plehve%2BRaaben
	The Times ... 22 May 1903

	THE ANTI-SEMITIC OUTRAGES AT KISHINEFF

	(FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT.)

	NEW YORK, May 21.

	The belated pretence that the Kishineff massacres are disapproved by the Russian Government makes some impression--not much--on the American mind. Putting the dismissal of Lieutenant-General von Raaben to the credit of the Tsar, the New York Times, assuming M. de PLehve's depsatch to be genuine since after three days it has not been denied, points out that Lieutenant-General von Raaben observed the bloody instructions of the Minister of the Interior in the spirit of the letter, and asks :--"What are we to say of the civilization of a country in which a Minister can put his name to such instructions?" 

	...Mr. Schiff and Mr. Levi, president of the B'nai Brith, and others are striving to deal with the practical questions sure to arise. Both regard a great Russo-Jewish emigration to America as probable. This some important American papers are inclined to favour, difficult as are the problems presented by a sudden increase in immigration from special causes. It is obvious, moreover, that if that immigration occurs on a great scale Mr. Hay will have precisely the same ground for protesting against Russian as against Rumanian cruelties.



31 May 1903

https://www.newspapers.com/image/169016938/?terms=Plehve%2BRaaben
	The Philadelpha Inquireer

	...JEWISH MASSACRE FULLY PLANNED

	Interior Minister Von Pleve Held Responsible for the Kishineff Horror

	First Paved the Way by Having Circulated Report That Czar Had Ordered Extermination of Hebrews

	BERLIN, May 30.--The part which the Russian Interior Minister, M. von Plehve, took in the Kishineff massacre is described by a person behind the scenes in Russian court life, in a communication to Dr. Barth, editor of the Nation. The writer says:

	Von Plehve, who was the assistant of General Ignatieff when the latter was chief Minister) in 1881, at the time the Jewish persecution took place, desired to impress the Czar with the unfitness of the common people to have any share in local self-government by a spectacular outbreak in the provinces in which the crudity and primeval character of the local people could be shown.

	Parallel with this object was a desire to divert the attention of the people from the government by giving their passions an outlet against the Jews. Von Plehve chose as his agent his political friend, Kroushevan, who is known as the most extreme anti-Semite in Russia, proprietor of the Bessarabyetz, a newspaper of Kishineff.

	Paved Way for Massacre

	Kroushevan prepared the minds of the people of Kishineff by publishing anti-Jewish articles. A rumor was started that a 'golden ukase' of the Czar had arrived, commanding the death of the Jews at Easter. Governor von Raaben refused to deny the rumor, and the vice governor, Ustugoff, was the censor and a contributor to the Bessarabyetz, so even the intelligent people of the town credited the report that the government was willing to exterminate the Jews. After the massacre Von Plehve informed Governor Von Raaben that he had permitted the outbreak to go too far, and that the barbarities of the drunken robbers was inexcusable.

	The Czar was deeply displeased with Governor Von Raaben and directed von Plehve to remove all the officials of the city and province.

	Toned Down Agent's Report

	Von Plehve urged that in inquiry first be made, and the Czar agreed to this. He said he would send one of his own adjutants, but Von Plehve suggested that Lopuchin, one of his assistants, be selected to inquire into the matter. Loupuchin returned with a mild report, which was too dark. Von PLehve revised it before its submission to the Czar.

	Von PLehve still retains possession of the Czar's mind. His position is completely unshaken, and it will continue unshaken so long as Von PLehve has daily personal access to his Majesty.


https://www.newspapers.com/image/32631061/?terms=Plehve%2BRaaben
	The TImes ... 01 Jun 1903

	THE KISHINEFF OUTRAGES.

	BERLIN, May 30.*

	Dr. Barth, the Radical leader, publishes in the weekly journal the Nation an unsighed paper, stated to be from the pen of a Russian occupying a high position, in which the writer says:--

	"M. de Plehve, Minister of the Interior, is directly responsible for the Kishineff massacre. He is a patron of M. Kruschewan, the editor of the Anti-Semitic paper Bessarabyetz, and has even granted him a subsidy of 25,000 roubles to conduct a second Anti-Semitic organ in St. Petersburg called the Znamya. M. de Plehve desired to increase the subsidy, but M. Witte, the Minister of Finance, intervened. M. Kruschewan then, thanks to M. de Plehve's patronage, was enabled to draw money from the National Bank without security."

	After asserting that General von Raaben, the Governor of Bessarabia, did nothing to avert or stop the rioting, while M. Ostagroff, the Vice-Governor, was actually at the same time a contributor to the Bessarabyetz, and also the censor, the writer proceeds:--

	"M. de Plehve desires to divert Christians from their own grievances so he conducts a campaign of Jew-baiting. The Tsar was indignant when he heard of the massacre. He wished to send an aide-de-camp to report on the matter, but M. de PLehve managed to dissuade his Majesty and sent instead M. Kopuchin, one of his creatures, who drew up a mild report, which M. de Plehve further doctored before submitting to the Tsar."

	Summing up, the writer says:--

	"The Kishineff massacre has nothing to do with revolutionary tendencies. It is simply the result of systematic Jew-baiting organized by M. de Plehve, whose position is still unshaken, and who holds the Tsar under his thumb by working upon his feelings and persuading him that the country is honeycombed with revolution and anarchy. No change is possible until M. de PLehve has ceased to have the ear of the Tsar. Further Anti-Semitic disturbances are probable."



framed Plehve for Kishineff, said he has too much influence with the Czar, later assassinate him (and blame on Jews?)

Times also says more massacres likely and will increase Russo-Jewish immigration to the U.S. (many sent back after investigations of wobblies, sabotage around WWI)


https://www.newspapers.com/image/369026323/?terms=Vyacheslav%2BPlehve
	Witte Regarded as the Man to Succeed von Plehve


https://books.google.com/books?id=TabKcOMnrc0C&pg=PA354&lpg=PA354
	Lopukhin, Plehve's director of police, criticizes Count Witte for repeating in his memiors without proof the allegation that Plevhe was responsible for the Kishinev pogroms


something going on there?


https://books.google.com/books?id=kTswgGNBFBAC&pg=PA783&lpg=PA783&dq=%22Plehve%22+protocols+zion&source=bl&ots=hc_-LP2yc8&sig=avNVz0xs3f3M1QA0VpKIHolaL0o&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwijhdOzw5nbAhVlzlkKHVnYAvMQ6AEINjAD#v=onepage&q=%22Plehve%22%20protocols%20zion&f=false
	The Memoirs of Count Witte

	In the dictated Memiors (pp. 1763-64) he gives a more sensational account of what was found in the papers of Plehve:

		In the portfoia of that Plehve had with him at the time of his assassination, P. N. Durnovo, his assisstant minister, found a letter purporting to have come from a secret police agent, a Jewess (from Kissingent, in Germany, I beleive), in which she alleged that I apparently had taken an active role in a revolutionary plot to assassinate His Majesty. I learned later that she had been told what to write. This was a product of a planb y which plehve would receive letters form his agents, in which they would report that I was involved in revolutionary plots, some of them directed against the Emperor. Then, with an innocent face, he would show these to the Emperor, saying that although he felt the allegations to be lies, he considered it his duty to inform his Majesty of the existence of such reports. Obviously, his aim was to turn His Majesty against me.



https://books.google.com/books?id=OUPSrjZfcm8C&pg=PA77&dq=plehve+hertzl&lr=&hl=ru&cd=3#v=onepage&q&f=false
	Herzl received news that Plehve, the czar's minister for internal affairs, was planning to outlaw the Russian Zionist movement. Herzl promptly wrote to him requesting an interview. Receiving no reply, he then turned to Madam von Korvin-Piatrovsky, who was personally friendly with Plehve, begging her to intercede on his behalf. This bore fruit, for on July 23, he received a letter from her telling him that not only had PLehve agreed to see him but he was "looking forward to making the acquaintance of so interesting a personality as Dr. Herzl." On August 10, 1903, Herzl entered PLehve's office. The conversation began with Plehve bemoaning the difficulties of assimilating Russian Jewry. In that context, he turned to the Russian Zionists, complaining that they were more concenred with fostering a localized Jewish nationalism than with migrating to Palestine. Such a tendency, PLehve affirmed, impeded Jewish assimilation. Plehve went on to reveal that he was aware of the fact that certain Russian Zionists were beginning to question Herzl's leadership. Impressed by Plevhe's knowledge, Herzl cleverly turned matters to his own advantage by making a comparison with Christopher Columbus's disgruntled crew who had begun to lose hope of every encountering land. Facing Plehve, Herzl stated, "Help me to reach land sooner, and the revolt will end." When Plehve asked what sort of help he could provide, Herzl stipulated the following three points: (1) the Russian government was to recommend to the Turkish sultan that he grant the Jews a colonial charter in Palestine, (2) the Russian government was to subsidize emigration to Palestine out of taxes from Jewish sources, (3) Russian Zionist Societies based on the Basel program were to be legalized. Much to Herzl's satisfaction, Plehve readily agreed to recommend all three measures to the czar on the understanding that the Sixth Zionist Congress, scheduled for August 23, 1903, would refrain from criticizing the Russian regime. Three days later, Plehve announced that the czar had approved Herzl's three-point request (In practice, no official overture on the part of the czar to the sultan was subsequently made.)

	With everything more or less straightened out with Plehve, Herzl called upon Witte, the minister responsible for finance, to ensure that restrictions placed on selling Jewish Colonial Trust shares be rescinded. Here, too, he was successful but not until he was subjected to Witte's views on the Jewish question. After declaring that there was legitimate reasons for becoming an anti-Semite, for the Jews were arrogant, dirty and involved in nasty pursuits such as pimping and usury, Witte disclosed that he personally was their friend. Then the "Jewish friend" went on to relate that he used to say to the czar, "Your Majesty, if it is possible to drown the six or seven million Jews in the Black Sea, I have absolutely no objection to it. But if it isn't possible, we must let them live."


...


https://books.google.com/books?id=ZJcUCgAAQBAJ&pg=PA64&lpg=PA64
	Easter in Kishinev: Anatomy of a Pogrom
	edited by Edward H. Judge

	...Finally, joined by a prominent Jewish doctor, lawyer, and rabbi, they went back to the governor's residence and actually met with von Raaben.

	The governor at this point seemed genuinely conerned, and spoke as if he were determining to head off further trouble. He talked about making a personal tour of the city, to see what he could do, and at one point he apparently had the horses hitched to his carriage. However, after a conversation with Okhrana chief Levendal, he changed his mind and decided he had to stay be the telephone so he could receive information, issue orders, and coordinate activities. What Levendal said is unkown, but the circumstances of his visit gave rise to suspicions that he had purposely dissuaded von Raaben from taking decisive action.

	The governor himself, however, would later defend vigorously his decision to stay put. In a situation where numerous small riots were breaking out simultaneously, he claimed, it would have been futile for him to try to direct the troops in person.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kishinev_pogrom
	`The Kishinev pogrom was an anti-Jewish riot that took place in Kishinev, then the capital of the Bessarabia Governorate in the Russian Empire, on April 19 and 20, 1903. Further rioting erupted in October 1905.[1] In the first wave of violence, which was associated with Easter, 49 Jews were killed, large numbers of Jewish women were raped and 1,500 homes were damaged. American Jews began large-scale organized financial help, and assisted in emigration.[2] The incident focused worldwide negative attention on the persecution of Jews in Russia.[3]

	The most popular newspaper in Kishinev, the Russian-language anti-Semitic newspaper Бессарабец (Bessarabetz, meaning "Bessarabian"), published by Pavel Krushevan, regularly published articles with headlines such as "Death to the Jews!" and "Crusade against the Hated Race!" (referring to the Jews). When a gentile Ukrainian boy, Mikhail Rybachenko, was found murdered in the town of Dubossary, about 25 miles north of Kishinev, and a girl who committed suicide by poisoning herself was declared dead in a Jewish hospital, the Bessarabetz paper insinuated that both children had been murdered by the Jewish community for the purpose of using their blood in the preparation of matzo for Passover.[4] Another newspaper, Свет (Svet, "Light") made similar insinuations. These allegations, and the prompting of the town's Russian Orthodox bishop, sparked the pogrom.[1]

	...The Times published a forged dispatch by Vyacheslav von Plehve, the Minister of Interior, to the governor of Bessarabia, which supposedly gave orders not to stop the rioters,[6] but, in any case, no attempt was made by the police or military to intervene to stop the riots until the third day.[1]

	...Despite a worldwide outcry, only two men were sentenced to seven or five years respectively and twenty-two were sentenced for one or two years. This pogrom was instrumental in convincing tens of thousands of Russian Jews to leave for the West or Palestine.[1]

	As such, it became a rallying point for early Zionists, especially what would become Revisionist Zionism, inspiring early self-defense leagues under leaders like Ze'ev Jabotinsky.[1]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antisemitism_in_the_Russian_Empire
	A series of genocidal persecutions, or pogroms, against Jews took place in Russia. These arose from a variety of motivations, not all of them related to Christian antisemitism. They have been attributed in part to religiously motivated antisemitism arising from the canard that Jews were responsible for the crucifixion of Jesus.[9][10] The primary trigger of the pogroms, however, is considered to have been the assassination of Tsar Alexander II.[11]

	The first pogrom is often considered to be the 1821 anti-Jewish riots in Odessa (modern Ukraine) after the death of the Greek Orthodox patriarch in Constantinople, in which 14 Jews were killed.[12] The virtual Jewish encyclopedia claims that initiators of 1821 pogroms were the local Greeks that used to have a substantial diaspora in the port cities of what was known as Novorossiya.[13]

	Long-standing repressive policies and attitudes towards the Jews were intensified after the assassination of Tsar Alexander II on 13 March 1881. This event was wrongly[8] blamed on the Jews and sparked widespread Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire, which lasted for three years, from 27 April 1881 to 1884.[14] A hardening of official attitudes under Tsar Alexander III and his ministers, resulted in the May Laws of 1882 which officially blamed Jews for the Tsar's death and severely restricted the civil rights of Jews within the Russian Empire, leading to harsh restrictions on Jewish landownership, prohibitions of Jews living in villages, and limits on the number of Jews accepted into educational institutions.[8] The Russian imperial police strictly applied the anti-Semitic discriminatory laws, while the Russian media engaged in unrestrained anti-Semitic propaganda.[8] In 1891, all Jews were systematically expelled from Moscow[8]. These repressions embittered many Jews against Russian society, convincing many that Russia could no longer be their home.

	The Tsar's minister Konstantin Petrovich Pobedonostsev stated the aim of the government with regard to the Jews was that "One third will die out, one third will leave the country and one third will be completely dissolved in the surrounding population".[14] In the event, the pogroms and the repressive legislation did indeed result in the mass emigration of Jews to western Europe and America. Between 1881 and the outbreak of the First World War, an estimated 2.5 million Jews left Russia - one of the largest group migrations in recorded history.[15]

	After the Pesach pogrom of 1903, pogroms became the official policy of the Russian Empire, and the anti-Semitic terror reached its peak in October 1905.[8]


...


https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/09546553.2015.1112277
	It was another associate of Marx and Engels, the Russian Anarchist philosopher Mikhail Bakunin, who, working with a radical Russian student Sergei Nechaev, helped to lay the foundation for one of the first leftist terror groups, Nechaev’s Narodnaya Rasprava (The People’s Retribution), briefly active in 1869. Narodnaya Rasprava would partially inspire the creation of a far better organized clandestine populist group, Narodnaya Volya , in 1879. 61 It was Narodnaya Volya that succeeded in assassinating Tsar Alexander II in 1881. Leftist terrorism would continue in Russia until the triumph of the Bolshevik Revolution, and it is worth recalling that Lenin’s elder brother, Aleksander, was executed in 1887 because of his association with a Narodnaya Volya plot to kill Tsar Alexander III. Anarchist terrorism would become a worldwide phenomenon.

	...In Russia, the Social Revolutionary Party picked up the thread from Narodnaya Volya after the repression of student rebellions at the turn of the century, and again after the aborted revolution of 1905–06, 65 and many of the practitioners of terrorism on the left lent their skills to the new regime’s ‘‘Red Terror’’ after the 1917 revolution. 66 The Communist International (or Comintern) became at the same time the instrument and the victim of Stalin’s terror outside Russia. 67



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socialist_Revolutionary_Party#History
	The party's ideology was built upon the philosophical foundation of Russia's Narodnik–populist movement of the 1860s–1870s and its worldview developed primarily by Alexander Herzen and Pyotr Lavrov. After a period of decline and marginalization in the 1880s, the Narodnik–populist school of thought about social change in Russia was revived and substantially modified by a group of writers and activists known as neonarodniki (neo-populists), particularly Viktor Chernov. 


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yevno_Azef
	In April 1893, Azef wrote to the Okhrana - the Russian police - offering to inform on his fellow students, for money. Later in the year, he moved to Switzerland, and in Berne, in 1894, joined the Union of Socialist Revolutionaries Abroad, organised by the respected narodnik couple, Chaim Zhitlovsky and Vera Lokhova.

	When he graduated, in 1899, the Okhrana ordered him to return to Russia, where he joined the Northern Union of Socialist Revolutionaries, led by A.A. Argunov, and became, in effect, his right hand man, even though Azef wanted the revolutionaries to resume the use of terrorist tactics, and Argunov did not believe in violence. He valued Azef's ability to resolve practical problems, such as setting up an underground printing operation - unaware that he was being assisted by the Okhrana. In November 1901, Argunov sent him to Europe to help unify the Northern, Southern and foreign Socialist Revolutionary unions into a single organisation. Argunov was arrested as soon as Azef had left Russia. In Switzerland, in 1902, Azef was a founding member of the Socialist Revolutionary Party, and became deputy head of its combat organisation, headed by Grigori Gershuni.


https://books.google.com/books?id=TqCRUbd51cAC&pg=PA272&dq=Zubatov+Narodnaya&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjgl-34_ZnbAhVH21MKHWt8AeYQ6AEIPTAE#v=onepage&q=Zubatov%20Narodnaya&f=false
	The real architect of police-regimented unions in a police-controlled paternal state was Sergei Vasilievich Zubatov, who now became cheief lieutentant of General Trepov in Moscow. It was Zubatov, and not Plehve or Trepov, to whose name would be attached the honor of the great experiment in police unionism, destined to go down in history as the zubatovshchina. As a gymnazia student he had entered the Nardonaya Volya, enlisting with the police almost simultaneously as a secret agent. Thereafter he had risen rapidly in the service, being the sponsor of many progressive innovations: photography, fingerprinting, and a superior system of secret epsionage on a scale hitherto unknown to Russia or in the world.

	...His biggest achievement so far had been the nationwide simultaneous raids that smashed the beginnings of the Social Democratic Party in 1897, rendering nugatory the efforts of the First Congress at Minsk. Now he had risen to the headship of the Moscow Okhrana or Secret Security Police, his only superiors being General Trepov, in charge of all the police service sof the Moscow Province, and Minister of the Interior Plehve. This, his most ambitious plan, was really the police counterpart of the general urge for organization that was beginning to take posession of all classes in Russia. Against zemstvo intellectuals, students, Social Democrats and Social Revolutionaries, he would offer his police unionism and police "socialism."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kazan_demonstration


https://www.newspapers.com/image/33128426/?terms=Kazan
	THE TIMES

	...(FROM OUR AUSTRIAN CORRESPONDENT.)
	VIENNA, DEC 24.

	...Towards the end of the services in the cathedral of Kazan, several young men, apparently students, assembled there, among them women. During the service they behaved offensively. After its conclusion the number of the rioters increased before the church, and one young man, addressing the crowd, said that S. Nicholas' Day was sacred to the memory of the exiles. Drawing then forth a red flag, with the inscription of "Federation and Liberty," he gave a cheer for liberty, which was taken up by the crowd, who then attacked the police. The public interfered in favour of order, and 21 men and women were arrested, the others dispersed. As I informed you some time ago, it was known some days beofre that a demonstration was planned for St. Nicholas' Day, and that the police were aware of it. It occurred nevertheless. It can only have been that the police were rather deceived about its character, and thought it was to be a loyal, warlike demonstration, while it had a seditious character. Nor was it it seems quite an isolated movement. From Moscow the news comes that a widespread association, under the device of "Federation and Liberty," has been discovered there, the aim of which is to make Russia a Federal Republic. The Empire was to form five separate States, which were to be untied by a Federation. The dynasty was to be set aside and the aristocracy done away with, and Communal and Republican institutions were to be introduced on the most Democratic basis. In consequence of the discoveries made, a number of arrests have been made in Moscow. There may be some exaggeration in all this, but it has been a long time the conviction of every one, the Russian Government not excepted, that the whole ground was deeply undermined by Socialist and Republican agitation. It is characteristic that such a moment as the present should have been chosen by the agitators to give a sign of life and to remind the Government of the troubles it might have at home just at the moment when it is prepared to establish order abroad.



https://www.newspapers.com/image/409186031/?terms=Kazan
	Glasgow Herald 09 Jan 1877

	The details which have arrived of the disturbance caused in the "Cathedral of Our Lady of Kazan," in St Petersburg, about the middle of last December, by a band of students, are curious and interesting at a time when it is continually the fashion to contrast or compare Great Britain with Russia, even although they may be, for the time being, politically side by side.  In this country the demonstrations of students ... does not count for much. It matters little to the general public whether Lord Beaconsfield is hissed at an English Univeristy Commemoration or elected a Scotch University rector; for in either case the students have no very strong, probably no very fixed, policital principles; and the public attach to their demonstrations, whatever form these may take, no more emphatic meaning than is implied in the blowing off of superfluous steam

	...In Russia, hwoever, as in all countries where despotism prevails, the demonstrations of students are accounted of considerable value--indeed of value probably altogether disproportionate to their character or dimensions. Students are the harbingers or the idexes, if not the initiators, of new national movements on the Continent. It was the German students who began the struggle for freedom against the First Napolean, which did not end until the dream of German unity was realised through the fall of the Third. It has ever been the students who in Spain and Italy have led the way towards and even led the van in those numerous revolutions, some beneficial, others michievous, which in the present century have changed the face of these countries; and similarly in Russia to the students has been givenr the leadership in the various movements--Polish, Anti-serf, Socialist, and Nihilist. Their latest outbreak is not even yet easy altogether to understand. The leading circumstances seem to be these :--On the occasion of the ordinary celebrations in honour of St Nicholas, the patron saint of Russia, a number of young people of both sexes, including students, appear to have assembled in the 'Cathedra of Our Lady of Kazan," in St Petersburg. They got up some small distrubances ...It was after the religious service was over that hte sutdents showed themselves in their true but still mysterious colours. They seem to have met outside the church; one of their number expressed himself to the effect that "We shall always esteem this day in remembrance of those sent to hard labour," i.e., to Siberia, and then came the flourishing of a red handkerchief with the words "Land and Liberty" on it. The disturbance, if it can be called by such a name, was easily quelled by the police, and the usual number of arrests appears to have been made.

	The remarkable thing about this affair is the alarm that it seems to have occasioned in the more sober and orderly Russian circles. So far as we can gather, the real cause of the distrubance, at least the only cause assigned which seems to have any meaning, was the fact that some of the medical students objected to have thier curriculum hurried to enable them to form part of the new army mobilisation. But this explanation has not been found, or at least thought, adequate. It is affirmed by some that the distrubance proceeds from some Polish propaganda, by others that it is connected with that Socialist or Democratic revolution which would, if it could, reduce Russia to the position of France in the days of the Commmune. As a matter of fact, however, it may be found to come from very mixed motives. 

	...Under the most good-natured of Czars, who has above all things been so instrumental in removing serfdom from the curses and crimes of the Empire, the social condition of the country must have improved. Yet we learn from such incidents as this, of which so much has been made by official authorities, that the volcano has not been put out, and that its internal fires may require only a spar to bring them to the stage of conflagration. Recent travellers in Russia are by no means favourable to the mode of education there or the results secured by it, and such obserers as Mr Buchan Telfer and Mr Arthur Arnold tell us flatly that the Russians hold a secondary place in their own country as compared with teh Jews, the Germans, or even the Americans--they are more ignorant, more observant of religious ceremonies or superstitions, and more intemperate than those who unite with them in the formation of their heterogeneous Empire; not is it necessary to call to remembrance the fact that pecnniarilly they are not in a good condition. From a thousand different directions we learn that if Russia is to live for long, not to say for ever, its internal reform must be soon and sure, and not even slow, and the students' demonstration of a few weeks ago is valuable mainly as indication how the wind blows.


https://www.newspapers.com/image/404992532/?terms=Kazan
	New England Farmer

	Feb. 8--All but three of the Russian students who, on the 18th of December (St. Nicholas Day), during service in the Cathedral of Kazan, made a demonstration and unfurled a red flag bearing the inscription, "Union and LIberty," have been sentenced to penal servitude or transportation. The participators in this demonstration were eleven women and twenty-one men.


https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321501567_The_Mass_Deportation_of_Poles_to_Siberia_1863-1880
	This book concerns the mass deportation of Poles and others to Siberia following the failed 1863 Polish Insurrection. The imperial Russian government fell back upon using exile to punish the insurrectionists and to cleanse Russia’s Western Provinces of ethnic Poles. It convoyed some 20,000 inhabitants of the Kingdom of Poland and the Western Provinces across the Urals to locations as far away as Iakutsk, and assigned them to penal labor or forced settlement. Yet the government’s lack of infrastructure and planning doomed this operation from the start, and the exiles found ways to resist their subjugation. Based upon archival documents from Siberia and the former Western Provinces, this book offers an unparalleled exploration of the mass deportation. Combing social history with an analysis of statecraft, it is a unique contribution to scholarship on the history of Poland and the Russian Empire. 


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uprising_of_Polish_political_exiles_in_Siberia
	The insurgents had brief contacts with Siberian nationalists, who hoped for a general Siberian uprising and the establishment of the republic of Svobodoslaviya (Свободославия).[2] They also had contact with Nikolai Serno-Solovyevich; another group supporting the insurgents was the Zemlya i Volya with activists such as Nikolai Chernyshevsky and Aleksandr Herzen. The Poles and the Russians planned a major uprising under Chernyshevsky and Walenty Lewandowski, but due to betrayal a wave of arrests disrupted their plans.

	Although the arrests prevented a major uprising from occurring, a group of about 700 Poles who were assigned to the construction of the Circumbaikal Highway (a road near Lake Baikal and the Mongolian border) decided to disarm the guards and escape via Mongolia to China, where they hoped to find English ships and return to Europe by way of America.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSsiberia.htm
	In 1754 the Russian government decided to send petty criminals and political opponents to eastern Siberia. Sentenced to hard labour (katorga), the convicts had to travel mostly on foot and the journey could take up to three years and it is estimated about half died before they reached their destination. George Kennan, the author of Siberia and the Exile System (1891) has explained: "When criminals had been thus knuted, bastinadoed, branded, or crippled by amputation, Siberian exile was resorted to as a quick and easy method of getting them out of the way; and in this attempt to rid society of criminals who were both morally and physically useless Siberian exile had its origin. The amelioration, however, of the Russian criminal code, which began in the latter part of the seventeenth century, and the progressive development of Siberia itself gradually brought about a change in the view taken of Siberian exile. Instead of regarding it, as before, as a means of getting rid of disabled criminals, the Government began to look upon it as a means of populating and developing a new and promising part of its Asiatic territory."

	Over the next 130 years around 1.2 million prisoners were deported to Siberia. Some prisoners helped to build the Trans-Siberian Railway. Others worked in the silver and lead mines of the Nertchinsk district, the saltworks of Usolie and the gold mines of Kara. Those convicts who did not work hard enough were flogged to death. Other punishments included being chained up in an underground black hole and having a 48lb beam of wood attached to a prisoner's chains for several years. Once a sentence had been completed, convicts had their chains removed. However, they were forced to continue living and working in Siberia.

	...On 1st March, 1881, Tsar Alexander II was assassinated by members of the People's Will. The following month Sophia Perovskaya, Andrei Zhelyabov, Nikolai Kibalchich, Nikolai Rysakov, Gesia Gelfman and Timofei Mikhailov were executed for their involvement in the assassination. Others such as Gesia Gelfman, Olga Liubatovich, Vera Figner, Grigory Isaev, Mikhail Frolenko and Anna Korba were exiled to Siberia. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSperovskaya.htm
	In 1869 Perovskaya enrolled in the Alarchin Women's College in St. Petersburg. She joined the women's circle and became friends with Anna Korba and others who had developed revolutionary ideas. Eventually she joined the secret society, Land and Liberty. The group, led by Mark Natanson, demanded that the Russian Empire should be dissolved. It also believed that two thirds of the land should be transferred to the peasants where it would be organized in self-governing communes. It remained a small group and at its peak only had around 200 members.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSzhelyabov.htm
	Andrei Zhelyabov, the son of a serf, was born in the Crimea in 1850. After attending school in Kerch he was admitted to the University of Odessa. Zhelyabov became involved in politics and in 1871 he was expelled from the university.

	He was arrested three times in 1874 but was released without charge. He was put on trial in 1878 but was acquitted.

	Zhelyabov joined the the People's Will and took part in three attempts on the life of Alexander II. Along with his lover, Sophia Perovskaya, he organized the assassination of the Tsar on 1st March, 1881.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSkibalchich.htm
	Nikolai Kibalchich, the son of a parish priest, was born in Kroop, Chernigov, in 1850. He studied at the Petersburg Engineering College and began experiments into jet propulsion. In 1871 he wrote to Catherine Breshkovskaya while she was in St Petersburg Prison: "I give you my word that I shall devote all my time and powers to helping on the revolution by terrorist means. I possess a certain amount vof knowledge which will enable me and my comrades to exploit my capabilities in the cause of the revolution. Very possibility it will require years of study before my knowledge is sufficiently complete to be of real help." Kilbalchich was carrying out research into explosives that could be used by terrorists.

	In 1875 Kibalchich was arrested for lending a prohibited book to a peasant. He spent three years in prison before being tried and sentenced to two months' imprisonment. On his release he joined the Land and Liberty organisation. Most of the group shared the anarchist views of Mikhail Bakunin and Sergi Nechayev and demanded that Russia's land should be handed over to the peasants and the State should be destroyed. The historian, Adam Bruno Ulam, has argued: "This Party, which commemorated in its name the revolutionary grouping of the early sixties, was soon split up by quarrels about its attitude toward terror. The professed aim, the continued agitation among the peasants, grew more and more fruitless." 

	...Nikolai Kibalchich, Sophia Perovskaya, Andrei Zhelyabov, Nikolai Rysakov, Gesia Gelfman and Timofei Mikhailov were all sentenced to death. Gelfman announced she was four months pregnant and it was decided to postpone her execution. Perovskaya, as a member of the high nobility, she could appeal against her sentence, however, she refused to do this. It was claimed that Rysakov had gone insane during interrogation. Kibalchich also showed signs that he was mentally unbalanced and talked constantly about a new flying machine he had invented. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSrysakov.htm
	Nikolai Rysakov was born in Tikhvin in 1862. He attended a technical school in St. Petersburg. Rysakov became involved in revolutionary politics and joined the Workers' Section of the People's Will.

	In 1881 it was decided to assassinate Alexander II. A directive committee was formed consisting of Andrei Zhelyabov, Timofei Mikhailov, Lev Tikhomirov, Mikhail Frolenko, Vera Figner, Sophia Perovskaya and Anna Yakimova. Zhelyabov was considered the leader of the group. However, Figner considered him to be overbearing and lacking in depth: "He had not suffered enough. For him all was hope and light." Zhelyabov had a magnetic personality and had a reputation for exerting a strong influence over women. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSgelfman.htm
	Gesia Gelfman, the daughter of a Jewish businessman, was born in Mazyr, Russia, in 1855. At seventeen, her father, without consulting his daughter, decided to marry her off to a family friend. Gelfman rebelled by running away to Kiev, where she began training to become a midwife.

	Gelfman joined the Pan-Russian Social Revolutionary group where she worked with Olga Liubatovich. In September, 1875, she was arrested and convicted of distributing illegal literature. As a result of her social status she was imprisoned in the St. Petersburg Workhouse.

	In 1879 Gelfman was sent from St. Petersburg to finish her sentence in Siberia. She escaped a few months later and when she returned she joined the People's Will group. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Grigory_Isaev.htm
	Grigory Isaev, the son of a postman, was born in 1857. He became involved in revolutionary politics and joined the Land and Liberty group.




...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Herzen
	The year 1855 gave Herzen reason to be optimistic; Alexander II had ascended the throne and reforms seemed possible. Herzen urged the Tsarist regime 'Onward, onward' towards reform in The Polar Star in 1856. Writing in 1857 Herzen became excited by the possibility of social change under Alexander II, "A new life is unmistakably boiling up in Russia, even the government is being carried away by it".[15] The Bell broke the story that the government was considering serf emancipation in July 1857, adding that the government lacked the ability to resolve the issue. Yet by 1858, full serf emancipation had not been achieved and Herzen grew impatient with reform. By May 1858 The Bell restarted its campaign to for the comprehensive emancipation of the serfs. Once the Emancipation reform of 1861 in Russia was achieved, The Bell's campaign changed to 'Liberty and Land', a program that tried to achieve further social change in support of serf rights. Alexander II granted serfs their freedom, the law courts were remodelled, trial by jury was established, and liberty was, to a great extent, conceded to the press.[4]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nikolay_Chernyshevsky
	Chernyshevsky's ideas were heavily influenced by Alexander Herzen, Vissarion Belinsky, and Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach. He saw class struggle as the means of society's forward movement and advocated for the interests of the working people. In his view, the masses were the chief maker of history. He is reputed to have used the phrase "the worse the better", to indicate that the worse the social conditions became for the poor, the more inclined they would be to launch a revolution.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSperovskaya.htm
	...On 17th February, 1880, Stefan Khalturin constructed a mine in the basement of the building under the dinning-room. The mine went off at half-past six at the time that the People's Will had calculated Alexander II would be having his dinner. However, his main guest, Prince Alexander of Battenburg, had arrived late and dinner was delayed and the dinning-room was empty. Alexander was unharmed but sixty-seven people were killed or badly wounded by the explosion.

	The People's Will contacted the Russian government and claimed they would call off the terror campaign if the Russian people were granted a constitution that provided free elections and an end to censorship. On 25th February, 1880, Alexander II announced that he was considering granting the Russian people a constitution. To show his good will a number of political prisoners were released from prison. Mikhail Loris-Melikof, the Minister of the Interior, was given the task of devising a constitution that would satisfy the reformers but at the same time preserve the powers of the autocracy. At the same time the Russian Police Department established a special section that dealt with internal security. This unit eventually became known as the Okhrana. Under the control of Loris-Melikof, undercover agents began joining political organizations that were campaigning for social reform.


...


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSsiberia.htm
	On 1st March, 1881, Tsar Alexander II was assassinated by members of the People's Will. ...Others such as Gesia Gelfman, Olga Liubatovich, Vera Figner, Grigory Isaev, Mikhail Frolenko and Anna Korba were exiled to Siberia. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSliubatovich.htm
	In January 1875 the women began distributing the newspaper, Rabotnik (The Worker), that was being produced by Bakunin in Berne. It was the first Russian-language paper to focus serious attention on the urban proletariat. However, it had little impact on the largely illiterate workers. However, the Russian secret police was informed and in August 1875, Sophia Bardina, Lydia Figner and Anna Toporkova, were arrested. Soon afterwards, Liubatovich and Gesia Gelfman were taken into custody.

	The trial took place on 14th March, 1877. Sophia Bardina stated in court: "All of these accusations against us would be terrible if they were true. But they are based on misunderstanding. I do not reject property if it is acquired by one's own labour. Every person has a right to his own labour and its products. So why do our masters give us only one-third of our labour-value? As for the family, I also do not understand. Is it the social system that is destroying it, by forcing a woman to abandon her family and work for wretched wages in a factory, where she and her children are inevitably corrupted; a system that drives a woman into prostitution through sheer poverty, and which actually sanctions this prostitution as something legitimate and necessary in any well-ordered society? Or is it we who are undermining it, we, who are attempting to eliminate this poverty, which is the chief cause of all our social ills, including the destruction of the family? As to religion, I have always been true to the principles established by the founder of Christianity, and have never propagandized against these principles. I am equally innocent of attempting to undermine the State. I do not believe any one individual is capable of destroying the State by force. If it is to be destroyed, it will be because it bears within it the embryo of its own destruction, holding as it does the people in political, economic and intellectual bondage."

	Liubatovich and Sophia Bardina were sentenced to nine years hard labour in Siberia, whereas Gesia Gelfman and Lydia Figner got five years's hard labour in factories. Bardina committed suicide but Liubatovich survived this experience. In Tobolsk she became popular among the local villagers. After a year or so she was allowed to stand in for the local doctor, who was a notorious drunkard. She was so successful she became known as the "miracle worker".

	In 1876 Liubatovich managed to escape and went into hiding in St. Petersburg. She joined the recently formed Land and Liberty secret society.

	...Liubatovich attempts ended in failure and she was herself arrested and sent to Siberia in November, 1882. She remained in captivity until the political amnesty that followed the 1905 Revolution. After her return to St. Petersburg she wrote her memoirs.

	Olga Liubatovich died in 1917.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSfigner.htm
	...Bardina and Olga Liubatovich were sentenced to nine years hard labour in Siberia, whereas Gesia Gelfman and Lydia Figner got five years's hard labour in factories.

	...Vera Figner now returned to Russia and joined the Land and Liberty group. Most of the group shared Bakunin's anarchist views and demanded that Russia's land should be handed over to the peasants and the State should be destroyed.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Mikhail_Frolenko.htm
	Mikhail Frolenko, of a retired sergeant major, was born in Stavropol in November 1848. He studied at the St. Petersburg Institute of Technology and in 1871 entered the Petrovskoe Agricultural Academy in Moscow.

	Frolenko became involved in revolutionary politics and in 1873 he became a member of the Moscow branch of the Circle of Tchaikovsky. According to the The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979): "He went underground in 1874 and from 1875 to 1877 was aligned with the Southern Rebels. Frolenko helped V. F. Kostiurin escape in 1877 and V. Stefanovich, L. G. Deutsch, and I. V. Bokhanovskii escape in 1878. He took part in an attempt to free P. I. Voinaraliskii and in the digging of a passage under the Kherson Treasury in 1879."

	In 1878, Frolenko became a member of Land and Liberty and attended the organization’s Lipetsk and Voronezh congresses. After the formation of the People’s Will, he was sent to tour southern Russia in search of recruits. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Anna_Korba.htm
	Anna Mengart, was born in the province of Tver, near Moscow, in 1847. Her father, Paul Mengart, was a Russian nobleman with extensive estates. According to George Kennan, the author of Siberia and the Exile System (1891): "She was carefully educated under the direction of her mother, a cultured and deeply religious woman, and at the early age of eighteen or nineteen she was married to a Swiss gentleman residing in Russia named Victor Korba. Her beauty and accomplishments made her greatly sought after in society, her husband was wealthy and was proud of her social success, and for a time she lived the life of a woman of the great world."

	In 1869 a school for the higher education of the daughters of the nobility was opened in St. Petersburg. Anna Korba immediately enrolled as a student, with the long-term objective of studying medicine in Zurich. The following year her husband's business failed and she was forced to abandon her plans to become a doctor. The couple now moved to Minsk where he obtained employment. Anna took a keen interest in the lives of the poor and she founded a society that raised funds for the purpose of promoting education for men and women who could not afford the fees. During the next few years she was the president of this society.

	On the outbreak of the Russo-Turkish War in 1877 Korba became a nurse in a hospital treating wounded Russian soldiers. Soon afterwards she joined the International Association of the Red Cross and went to the front where she served in a Russian field-hospital. 

	...Anna Korba was radicalized by this experience and on her return from Rumania she distributed political propaganda with other radicals such as her former school friend, Sophia Perovskaya. During this period she read the works of Karl Marx and Ferdinand Lassalle.

	...Mikhail Bakunin and Sergi Nechayev published the book Catechism of a Revolutionist. It included the famous passage: "The Revolutionist is a doomed man. He has no private interests, no affairs, sentiments, ties, property nor even a name of his own. His entire being is devoured by one purpose, one thought, one passion - the revolution. Heart and soul, not merely by word but by deed, he has severed every link with the social order and with the entire civilized world; with the laws, good manners, conventions, and morality of that world. He is its merciless enemy and continues to inhabit it with only one purpose - to destroy it." The book had a great impact on young Russians and in 1876 the group Land and Liberty was formed. Anna Korba was one of its first members. Most of the group shared Bakunin's anarchist views and demanded that Russia's land should be handed over to the peasants and the State should be destroyed. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Anna_Yakimova.htm
	Anna Yakimova, the daughter of a parish priest, was born in 1856. She attended school in Viatka (Kirov) where she met Stephan Khalturin.

	In 1872, against the advice of her father, she obtained a job as a teacher at a school in Orlov. She also became involved in the program to give smallpox vaccinations to the peasants living in local villages. During this period she became influenced by the radical political ideas of Mikhail Bakunin and distributed pamphlets to the peasants. Cathy Porter, the author of Fathers and Daughters: Russian Women in Revolution (1976) argued: "Although she found the peasantry eager to listen to her explanation of the injustices under which they laboured, they seemed incapable of applying what they learnt to their own lives. The fault, she concluded, lay in herself; she was isolated from any central revolutionary organization."

	Yakimova joined forces with Sophia Perovskaya and Tatiana Lebedeva to distribute revolutionary literature. For a while on a commune with Catherine Breshkovskaya. In 1875 the school in which Yakimova was teaching was searched and she was arrested. She spent a year in solitary confinement in the local prison before being taken to St. Petersburg to await trial.

	Yakimova refused to speak in her own defence at the trial where 193 women were accused of revolutionary activities. Breshkovskaya was one of eighteen women to be sentenced to between three to ten years hard labour in Siberia. Forty were sent to exile in the "remote provinces" of Russia. However, most of the women, including Yakimova were acquitted for lack of evidence.

	After spending three years in prison Yakimova and a couple of friends set off for the Tver region, "dressed all in black and living on a diet of black bread and onions (they had learnt to do without tea in prison)." Yakimova then moved to Nizhny Novgorod, where she got a job in a textile factory. When she protested about factory conditions she was denounced as a "propagandist" and she was forced to flee the area.

	Yakimova now returned to St. Petersburg where she joined the secret society, Land and Liberty.


spartacus-educational.com/RUSbreshkovskaya.htm
	Catherine Breshkovskaya, the daughter of a prosperous landowner who owned serfs, was born in Vitebsk, Russia, on 13th January, 1844. As a child she developed a strong sympathy for the plight of the rural poor: "Men would come to the master begging for bread; women would come weeping, demanding back their children of whom they had been robbed. These things tormented me as a child, pursued me into my bed, where I would lie awake for hours, unable to sleep thinking of all the horrors that surrounded me."

	She later told Louise Bryant: "When I think back upon my past life I, first of all, see myself as a tiny five-year-old girl, who was suffering all the time, whose heart was breaking for some one else; now for the driver, then again for the chamber-maid, or the labourer or the oppressed peasant - for at that time there was still serfdom in Russia. The impression of the grief of the people had entered so deeply into my child's soul that it did not leave me during the whole of my life."

	Catherine's parents had liberal views and had welcomed the emancipation of the serfs and had encouraged her at the age of sixteen to open a peasant school on their estate. She later recalled "If there is anything good in me, I owe it all to them." However, she was aware that the freed serfs still had considerable problems: "In one village near ours, where the peasants refused to leave their plots, they were drawn up in a line along the village street. Every tenth man was called out and flogged, and some died. Two weeks later, every fifth man was flogged.... I heard many heart-rending stories in my little school house. The peasants would throng to our house night and day."

	According to Cathy Porter, the author of Fathers and Daughters: Russian Women in Revolution (1976): "After a year of running the school Catherine began desperately to search for some more general political solution to the local misery she saw around her, and at the age of seventeen, after some conflicts with her parents, she set off alone for the capital. In the train to St Petersburg she found herself sitting next to a man who started talking to her of the early populists. They had gone to the countryside, he said, without any idea of social reconstruction in their minds; they simply wanted to teach the peasants to read, to interest them in new ideas, to give them some medical help and to raise them in any way they could from their darkness and misery. In the process, these young people had been able to formulate some of their ideals for a better society." The man she was talking to was Peter Kropotkin. 


did she really get on a train and accidentally meet Peter Kropotkin tho

	
	In St Petersburg Kropotkin introduced Catherine to various radical circles and helped her to get a job as a private teacher. Catherine later recalled that she met several young women, who like her "had won their personal freedom, now wanted to make use of it, not for their own personal enjoyment but to carry to the people the knowledge that had emancipated them."

	Under pressure from her parents she returned to Vitebsk where she opened a school for peasant girls. A few years later she met a local wealthy landowner who shared her views. They married and together they established a co-operative bank and a peasant agricultural school on his estate. She was also a regular visitor to Kiev and and with a couple of friends established a socialist commune in Kiev, that had been influenced by the writings of Alexander Herzen, Peter Lavrov and Pavel Axelrod,

	After the birth of her son, Nikolai, she left her child with her sister-in-law and became a full-time revolutionary. She later wrote: "I felt that in my child my youth was buried, and that when he was taken from my body, the fire of my spirit had gone out with him. But it was not so... I knew that I could not be a mother and a revolutionary. Among the women involved in the struggle for freedom in Russia there were many who chose to be fighters rather than members of the victims of tyranny."

	Breshkovskaya gave out political leaflets in rural areas: "In one of the villages I gave away my last illegal leaflet and then decided to write an appeal to the peasants myself. Stephanovich made three copies of it... In those terribly ignorant times when the only written papers in the villages were the orders issued by the authorities, their faith in a written word was great, all the more so since there was no one in the villages who could write even moderately well." 

	Breshkovskaya was eventually arrested by the authorities and after being held in solitary confinement in Kiev Prison for a year. In January, 1878, Breshkovskaya and thirty-six other women were tried for carrying out "revolutionary propaganda". She was found guilty and sentenced to twenty years hard labour in Siberia. She became a well-known international figure when she was interviewed by the American journalist, George Kennan for his book Siberia and the Exile System.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Tatiana_Lebedeva.htm
	Tatiana Lebedeva, the daughter of Vasily Lebedev, a Moscow government official, was born in 1853. Her mother died soon after her birth. After finishing her education at the Moscow Institute she enrolled in a course with the intention of being a village school teacher. However, she instead moved in with her brother and his wife who had developed radical political views. Tatiana later recalled that this enabled her to "fill in the gaps in her revolutionary education."

	Lebedeva joined forces with Anna Yakimova and Sophia Perovskaya to distribute revolutionary literature. In 1874 she was arrested and sent to prison for eight months. After serving her sentence she was handed over to her brother's protection under a kind of house-arrest. With the outbreak of the Russo-Turkish War she volunteered as a nurse, but on the day she was due to leave she was arrested again and taken to the capital and placed in the St Petersburg Women's House of Detention. 

	...After she was released from prison Lebedeva joined the secret society, Land and Liberty. Senior members of the organisation included Mark Natanson, George Plekhanov and Vera Zasulich. She disagreed with Plekhanov about the way forward and began associating with figures such as Lev Tikhomirov and Alexander Kviatkovsky.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSzasulich.htm
	Vera Zasulich was born into a poor family living in Mikhaylovka, Russia, in 1849. Her father died when she was three years old and as her mother was unable to cope, she sent Vera to live with wealthy relatives in Balakovo.

	When Zasulich finished her schooling she moved to St. Petersburg and found work as a clerk. She became involved in radical politics and met Sergi Nechayev, the co-author with Mikhail Bakunin of Catechism of a Revolutionist. "Nechayev began to tell me his plans for carrying out a revolution in Russia in the near future.... I could imagine no greater pleasure than serving the revolution. I had dared only to dream of it, and yet now he was saying that he wanted to recruit me, that otherwise he wouldn't have thought of saying anything."

	Lev Deich got to know her during this period: "Because of her intellectual development, and particularly she was so well read, Vera Zasulich was more advanced than the other members of the circle... Anyone could see that she was a remarkable young woman. You were struck by her behavior, particularly by the extraordinary sincerity and unaffectedness of her relations with others."

	Zasulich joined a weaving collective and became active in the movement to educate workers, conducting literacy classes for them in the evenings. In 1876 Zasulich found work as a typesetter for an illegal printing press. A member of the Land and Liberty group, when Zasulich heard that one of her fellow comrades, Tatiana Lebedeva, had witnessed one of the prisoners, Alexei Bogoliubov, take a terrible beating at the hands of Dmitry Trepov, the Governor General of St. Petersburg, she decided she must take revenge.


...


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSmikhailov.htm
	In 1880 the People's Will decided to assassinate Alexander II. According to the historian, Joel Carmichael: "Although this populist organization retained the same humane vocabulary - revolving around socialism, faith in the people, the overthrow of the autocracy, and democratic representation - its sole objective was, in fact, the murder of the tsar.

	...The People's Will contacted the Russian government and claimed they would call off the terror campaign if the Russian people were granted a constitution that provided free elections and an end to censorship. On 25th February, 1880, Alexander II announced that he was considering granting the Russian people a constitution. To show his good will a number of political prisoners were released from prison. Mikhail Loris-Melikof, the Minister of the Interior, was given the task of devising a constitution that would satisfy the reformers but at the same time preserve the powers of the autocracy. At the same time the Russian Police Department established a special section that dealt with internal security. This unit eventually became known as the Okhrana. Under the control of Loris-Melikof, undercover agents began joining political organizations that were campaigning for social reform.

	In January, 1881, Mikhail Loris-Melikof presented his plans to Alexander II. They included an expansion of the powers of the Zemstvo. Under his plan, each zemstov would also have the power to send delegates to a national assembly called the Gosudarstvenny Soviet that would have the power to initiate legislation. Alexander was concerned that the plan would give too much power to the national assembly and appointed a committee to look at the scheme in more detail.

	The People's Will became increasingly angry at the failure of the Russian government to announce details of the new constitution. They therefore began to make plans for another assassination attempt.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSgelfman.htm
	Kibalchich, Isaev and Yakimova were commissioned to prepare the bombs that were needed to kill the Tsar. Isaev made some technical error and a bomb went off badly damaging his right hand. Yakimova took him to hospital, where she watched over his bed to prevent him from incriminating himself in his delirium. As soon as he regained consciousness he insisted on leaving, although he was now missing three fingers of his right hand. He was unable to continue working and Yakimova now had sole responsibility for preparing the bombs.

	...The Okhrana discovered that their was a plot to kill Alexander II. One of their leaders, Andrei Zhelyabov, was arrested on 28th February, 1881, but refused to provide any information on the conspiracy. He confidently told the police that nothing they could do would save the life of the Tsar. Alexander Kviatkovsky, another member of the assassination team, was arrested soon afterwards. 

	...Gelfman's execution was postponed because she was pregnant. According to her friend, Olga Liubatovich: "Gesia languished under the threat of execution for five months; finally her sentence was commuted, just before she was to deliver. At the hands of the authorities, the terrible act of childbirth became a case of torture unprecedented in human history. For the delivery, they transferred her to the House of Detention. The torments suffered by poor Gesia Gelfman exceeded those dreamed up by the executioners of the Middle Ages; but Gesia didn't go mad - her constitution was too strong. The child was born live, and she was even able to nurse it." Soon after she gave birth her daughter was taken from her.

	Gesia Gelfman died from peritonitis on 12th October, 1882.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSliubatovich.htm
	Olga Liubatovich, the daughter of a political refugee from Montenegro, was born in 1854. Liubatovich wanted to train as a doctor but this was impossible in Russia so in 1871 she went to Zurich to study medicine. While there she met other Russian women who held radical opinions about politics. This included Sophia Bardina, Vera Figner, Lydia Figner and Anna Toporkova.

	Franziska Tiburtius met her during this period: "Behind the table was an enigmatic being whose biological character was not at first clear to me. A roundish boyish face, short-cut hair parted askew, enormous blue glasses, a quite youthful tender expression, a coarse jacket, a cigarette burning in its mouth - everything about it was boyish, and yet there was something which belied the impression it desired to create. I looked stealthily under the table and discovered a bright faded cotton skirt. This being took no notice of my presence and remained absorbed in a large book, every now and then rolling a cigarette... It appeared that this phenomenon was a seventeen-year-old Russian girl from Moscow, Miss Liubatovich, which fact she confirmed with a brief nod."

	The anarchist Peter Kropotkin also met Liubatovich and her friends: "They lived as most students do, especially the women, that is on very little. Tea and bread, some milk and a thin slice of meat, amidst spirited discussions of the latest news from the socialist world and the last book read - that was their regular fate. Those who had more money than was needed for such a way of life donated it to the common cause ... As to dress, the most parsimonious economy reigned in that direction. Our girls in Zurich seemed defiantly to throw this question at the population there: can there be a simplicity of dress which does not become a girl if she is young, intelligent and full of energy?"

	The activities of these young women began to concern the Russian authorities. The Russian Government Herald published an article on 21st May, 1872, claiming: "Several Russian girls set off abroad to attend lectures at Zurich University. At first there were only a very few of them, but now there are more than a hundred women there... Largely because of this increase in Russian women students, the ring-leaders of the Russian emigration have chosen this town as a centre for revolutionary propaganda, and have done all in their power to enlist into their ranks these young women students. Under their influence, women have abandoned their studies for fruitless political agitation. Young Russians of both sexes have formed political parties of extreme shades... In the Russian Library they hold lectures of an exclusively revolutionary nature... It has become common practice for the girls to attend workers' meetings... Young and inexperienced minds are being led astray by political agitators, and set on the wrong course. And to cap it all, meetings and party struggles throw the girls into such confusion that they accept this fruitless and fraudulent propaganda as real life. Once drawn into politics the girls fall under the influence of the leaders of the emigration, and become compliant weapons in their hands. Some of them go from Zurich to Russia and back two or three times a year, carrying letters, instructions and proclamations and taking an active part in criminal propaganda. Others are led astray by communist theories about free love, and under pretext of fictitious marriages carry to the most extreme limits their rejection of the fundamental laws of morality and feminine virtue. The immoral conduct of Russian women has aroused the indignation of the local citizens against them, and landladies are even refusing to accept them as lodgers. Some of the girls have sunk so low as to practise that branch of obstetrics which is judged a criminal offence, and deserves the utter contempt of all honourable people." 


did she read it?


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSfigner.htm
	Vera Figner was the one remaining leader of the People's Will who initially escaped capture. She claimed that the "harvest was plentiful, the reapers were few". She tried to recruit "reapers" but with little success. Geoffrey Hosking, the author of A History of the Soviet Union (1985), wrote that ultimately the efforts of the People Will ended in failure: "In 1881 it actually succeeded in assassinating the Emperor Alexander II. But setting up a different regime, or even putting effective pressure on Alexander's successor - that proved beyond their capacities. Their victory was a pyrrhic one: all it produced was more determined repression.

	Vera Figner was arrested on 10th February 1883. Tsar Alexander III commented, "Thank God that terrible woman has been caught." The year she spent in pretrial imprisonment in the Peter and Paul Fortress was spent learning English and writing her memoirs. She was interrogated by Vyacheslav Plehve, Director of the Police Department and Dmitry Tolstoy, the Minister of the Interior. Tolstoy told her: "What a pity there is so little time or I would have been able to convince you of the uselessness of terror." She replied "I am sorry sorry too. I expect I would have been able to turn you into a narodovolnik."

	Figner's trial began on 28th September, 1884. She was found guilty and sentenced to death. However, it was commuted at the last moment to life imprisonment in the Schlusselberg Fortress. According to one source the "solitary confinement and semi-starvation in airless unheated cells was the nearest conceivable approximation of death." Figner wrote that: "The strain under which I had been living during my years of freedom, which had before been subdued and repressed, now left me; there was no task for my will, and the human being woke within me."

	Figner was released in 1904 and joined the Socialist Revolutionaries but left after discovering that Evno Azef had been working as a double agent. Figner welcomed the Russian Revolution in 1917 and for a short time worked for the People's Commissariat for Social Security under Alexandra Kollontai. She also joined the Writers' Union when it was formed in 1924.

	In 1927 she published an autobiography, Memoirs of a Revolutionary. By this time she was highly critical of Joseph Stalin and Victor Serge later revealed that Figner was closely watched by the Communist Secret Police and for many years was in danger of being arrested.

	Vera Figner died in Moscow, aged 89, on 15th June, 1942.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Mikhail_Frolenko.htm
	In November 1879 Stefan Khalturin managed to find work as a carpenter in the Winter Palace. According to Adam Bruno Ulam, the author of Prophets and Conspirators in Pre-Revolutionary Russia (1998): "There was, incomprehensible as it seems, no security check of workman employed at the palace. Stephan Khalturin, a joiner, long sought by the police as one of the organizers of the Northern Union of Russian workers, found no difficulty in applying for and getting a job there under a false name. Conditions at the palace, judging from his reports to revolutionary friends, epitomized those of Russia itself: the outward splendor of the emperor's residence concealed utter chaos in its management: people wandered in and out, and imperial servants resplendent in livery were paid as little as fifteen rubles a month and were compelled to resort to pilfering. The working crew were allowed to sleep in a cellar apartment directly under the dining suite."


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Mikhail_Frolenko.htm
	Frolenko remained in prison until the 1905 Russian Revolution. He was freed in October 1905 and went to live in Gelendzhik, where he contributed to the journal Byloe. Frolenko moved to Moscow in 1922, where he became a member of the Society of Former Political Prisoners and Exiles and served on the editorial board of the journal Katorga Issylka. He joined the Russian Communist Party in 1936.

	Mikhail Frolenko died in Moscow on 15th February, 1938. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Anna_Korba.htm
	Anna Korba was arrested on 5th June, 1882. At her trial Korba argued: "Gentlemen-Senators, you are well acquainted with the fundamental laws of the Russian Empire. You are aware that no one has a right to advocate any change in the existing imperial form of Government, or even think of such a thing. Merely to present to the Crown a collective petition is forbidden - and yet the country is growing, and developing, the conditions of social life are becoming day by day more and more complicated, and the moment approaches when the Russian people will burst through the barriers from which there is no exit... The historical task set before the party of the Will of the People is to widen these barriers 

	...Anna Korba was released from prison in 1902 and continued to carry out propaganda work until the Russian Revolution. She died in 1930. 


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUS-Anna_Yakimova.htm
	Anna Yakimova, who was also pregnant, probably by Grigory Isaev, managed to escape to Kiev. She was soon arrested and she was tried alongside Isaev, Mikhail Frolenko, Tatiana Lebedeva and sixteen other party members. Although they were all found guilty, because of the international protests by Victor Hugo and other well-known figures, they were not sentenced to death. Instead they were sent to Trubetskov Dungeon. 

	...Yakimova had her baby in the prison and had to watch over him night and day to protect him from rats. In 1883 she and Tatiana Lebedeva were transferred to the Kara Prison Mines. The journey north, which was on foot, lasted two years, was hardly better than life in Trubetskov Dungeon. As it was clear that her baby would not survive the long journey, Yakimova gave it away to "some well-wishers who had come out to greet the prisoners with messages of support and tears of sympathy"

	The women joined other revolutionaries such as Catherine Breshkovskaya and Anna Korba at Kara. Anna was twenty-five years old by the time she reached the prison mines. Tatiana, three years older, was in a poor state of health and was described as a "semi-blind, shaven-headed, prematurely aged cripple". Despite being cared for by Korba, who was a qualified doctor, she died in 1887, aged 34.

	Anna Yakimova remained in prison until the 1905 Russian Revolution. After the failure of the revolution she was rearrested and sent to Siberia. She was released finally after the Russian Revolution in 1917. It is believed she died during the Second World War. 


spartacus-educational.com/RUSbreshkovskaya.htm
	In 1901 Breshkovskaya joined with Victor Chernov, Gregory Gershuni, Nikolai Avksentiev, Alexander Kerensky and Evno Azef, to form the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR) and spent much of her time touring the world making speeches and raising money for the party. The main policy of the SR was the confiscation of all land. This would then be distributed among the peasants according to need. The party was also in favour of the establishment of a democratically elected constituent assembly and a maximum 8-hour day for factory workers.

	Breshkovskaya was arrested in 1907 and was sentenced to be exiled to Siberia for life. She was only released after the fall of the overthrow of Nicholas II. When she arrived back in St Petersburg she supported the Provisional Government, that included two members of the SR, Alexander Kerensky, Minister of Justice and Victor Chernov Minister of Agriculture. 

	In July 1917, Kerensky became prime minister. He invited Breshkovskaya to become one of his advisers and arranged for her to live in the Winter Palace. The journalist, Louise Bryant interviewed Breshkovskaya for her book, Six Months in Russia (1918): "I saw Babushka a good many times after that and found why she lived in this back room on the top floor of the Winter Palace. First, it was because she chose to live there. They had offered her the choice of the beautiful apartments and she had refused anything but this simple room. She insisted on having her bed and all her belongings crammed into the tiny place, and ate all her meals there. I don't know whether it was her long years in prison that made her assume this peculiar attitude, or if it was just because she was a simple woman and very close to the people." 

	...When the Assembly refused to support the programme of the new Soviet Government, the Bolsheviks walked out in protest. Later that day, Lenin announced that the Constituent Assembly had been dissolved. Soon afterwards all opposition political groups, including the Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and the Constitutional Democratic Party, were banned in Russia.

	Catherine Breshkovskaya was upset by these events and decided to live in Czechoslovakia. Breshkovskaya founded Russian-language schools in Ruthenia before retiring to Khvaly, where she died on 12th September 1934.


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSzasulich.htm
	...When Zasulich heard the news she went to the local prison determined to assassinate Trepov. She later recalled that she went to Trepov's office with a revolver hidden under her cloak: "The revolver was in my hand. I pressed the trigger - a misfire. My heart missed a beat. Again I pressed. A shot, cries. Now they'll start beating me. This was next in the sequence of events I had thought through so many times. I threw down the revolver - this also had been decided beforehand; otherwise, in the scuffle, it might go off by itself. I stood and waited. Suddenly everybody around me began moving, the petitioners scattered, police officers threw themselves at me, and I was seized from both sides."

	Zasulich was arrested and charged with attempted murder. During the trial the defence produced evidence of such abuses by the police, and Zasulich conducted herself with such dignity, that the jury acquitted her. When the police tried to re-arrest her outside the court, the crowd intervened and allowed her to escape. 

	...Vera Zasulich was forced into hiding but remained active in politics and joined the Black Repartition group as by this time she had rejected the use of violence to gain a democratic system. Zasulich was a strong supporter of George Plekhanov. Zasulich, like Plekhanov, was highly critical of the terror campaign being carried out by the People's Will.

	...She returned to Russia during the 1905 Revolution but after its failure ceased to be active in politics. During the First World War Zasulich supported the war effort and opposed the Bolshevik Revolution.

	Vera Zasulich died in 1919.

...

http://www.larouchepub.com/eiw/public/2002/eirv29n31-20020816/eirv29n31-20020816_035-sergei_zubatovs_police_socialism.pdf

https://books.google.com/books?id=4B4qAAAAYAAJ&dq=the+plough+woman&focus=searchwithinvolume&q=von+Plehve
	

...


https://swiftlytiltingplanet.wordpress.com/2009/12/11/five-sisters-women-against-the-tsar-the-memoirs-of-five-young-anarchist-women-of-the-1870s/

...


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergei_Zubatov
	After a series of strikes, in August 1903 Zubatov was expelled personally from his position as director of the Special Section by Interior Minister Vyacheslav von Plehve, and the state-sponsored trade unions were disbanded. 