peurto rico said to have corruption problem

corrupt local officials will take federal money and only spend a portion on it on needed infrastructure projects, pocketing the rest

some officials have been arrested for this


corrupt politicians are said to use a "bread and circuses" kindof trick to get away with it, e.g. there is a festival that takes place in a different city every year, and a corrupt mayor will host the festival in his town to stay popular (anything interesting in towns that get selected?)


Peurto Rico said to be close-knit, "everybody knows each other," so corrupt officials will often favor friends (I guess it's like there's more "it's not what you know, it's who you know" going on in Peurto Rico?)


Puerto Rico has a problem with organized crime, similar to cartels although they are not called cartels. They pay off officials and maybe act like a state within a state or kingmakers. It is said to be difficult to get things done without the approval of these organized crime entities.



------


Spanish American war precipitated by unrest in Cuba, then started after U.S. battleship blown up although blame is disputed (sounds familiar...)


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_McKinley
	For decades, rebels in Cuba had waged an intermittent campaign for freedom from Spanish colonial rule. By 1895, the conflict had expanded to a war for Cuban independence.[126] As war engulfed the island, Spanish reprisals against the rebels grew ever harsher. American public opinion favored the rebels, and McKinley shared in their outrage against Spanish policies.[127] However while public opinion called for war to liberate Cuba, McKinley favored a peaceful approach, hoping that through negotiation, Spain might be convinced to grant Cuba independence, or at least to allow the Cubans some measure of autonomy.[128] The United States and Spain began negotiations on the subject in 1897, but it became clear that Spain would never concede Cuban independence, while the rebels (and their American supporters) would never settle for anything less.[129]

	In January 1898, Spain promised some concessions to the rebels, but when American consul Fitzhugh Lee reported riots in Havana, McKinley agreed to send the battleship USS Maine there to protect American lives and property.[130] On February 15, the Maine exploded and sank with 266 men killed.[131] Public attention focused on the crisis and the consensus was that regardless of who set the bomb, Spain had lost control over Cuba. McKinley insisted that a court of inquiry first determine whether the explosion was accidental.[132] Negotiations with Spain continued as the court considered the evidence, but on March 20, the court ruled that the Maine was blown up by an underwater mine.[133] As pressure for war mounted in Congress, McKinley continued to negotiate for Cuban independence.[134] Spain refused McKinley's proposals, and on April 11, McKinley turned the matter over to Congress. He did not ask for war, but Congress declared war anyway on April 20, with the addition of the Teller Amendment, which disavowed any intention of annexing Cuba.[135]


Apparently McKinley didn't want the war?

after Spanish American war, U.S. had Guam, Peurto Rico, and Philippenes as territories and Cuba liberated due to the Treaty of Paris. The U.S promised liberty to Puerto Rico, but screwed them over with "insular cases" instead starting in 1901.

insulur cases were series of supreme court cases basically saying constitution doesn't apply to "colonies" or people like those in Puerto Rico based on "bizzare" reasoning:


http://www.history.com/news/puerto-ricos-complicated-history-with-the-united-states
	With the westward expansion of the 19th century, the U.S. established “incorporated territories” that could and did become formal American states—like the Colorado Territory. But in 1901, a series of legal opinions known as the Insular Cases argued that Puerto Rico and other territories ceded by the Spanish were full of “alien races” who couldn’t understand “Anglo-Saxon principles.” Therefore, the Constitution did not apply to them, and Puerto Rico became an “unincorporated territory” with no path forward to statehood.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insular_Cases
	Former Puerto Rico Supreme Court Chief Justice José Trías Monge contends that the Insular Cases were based on premises that would be considered bizarre today, such as:[16]

	    Democracy and colonialism are "fully compatible".
	    There is "nothing wrong when a democracy such as the United States engages in the business of governing other" subjects that have not participated in their democratic election process.
	    People are not created equal, some races being superior to others.
	    It is the "burden of the superior peoples, the white man's burden, to bring up others in their image, except to the extent that the nation which possesses them should in due time determine".[16]

	In Harris v. Rosario, 446 U.S. 651 (1980), the Court applied Califano v. Torres, 435 U.S. 1 (1978) in a succinct per curiam order, holding that less aid to Puerto Rican families with dependent children did not violate the Equal Protection Clause, because in U.S. territories Congress can discriminate against its citizens applying a rational basis review. Justice Marshall wrote a staunch dissent, noting that Puerto Ricans are U.S. citizens and that the Insular Cases are questionable.




The treaty of Paris in 1898 was decried as imperialism in the Senate but McKinley pushed for it. In 1901 he was assassinated by agents believed to be working for Okhrana (https://pastebin.com/5M6F9Qqs).

What was going on there?

If McKinley's intent was to make the U.S. imperialist, he would be helping the Okhrana, but he was assassinated in 1901 anyway.


------


https://millercenter.org/president/mckinley/foreign-affairs
	As the new century loomed just over the horizon, the time seemed ripe for many Americans to look beyond their continental borders to a place of destiny in the world. Historian Frederick Jackson Turner had warned Americans, in his much-reproduced speech delivered at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair, that the new century would be the first in U.S. history in which no frontier existed for them to conquer. Many Americans interpreted this to mean that new frontiers were integral to national greatness. For example, Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan preached the doctrine of American expansionism in twenty books and numerous widely quoted essays. He asserted that no modern nation could be a great nation without a powerful navy, a superior merchant fleet, and overseas colonies. Turner's lectures and Mahan's writings greatly influenced political leaders like Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge. These individuals looked beyond American shores for new frontiers, world markets, and overseas colonies.


a campaign to warm Americans to imperialism? said to have influenced Teddy Roosevelt, who was president after McKinley



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodore_Roosevelt#Vice_President
	In November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died of heart failure, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, Roosevelt was reluctant to take the powerless position and issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination.[110] Additionally, Roosevelt was informed by President McKinley and campaign manager Mark Hanna that he was not being considered for the role of vice president due to his actions prior to the Spanish–American War. Eager to be rid of Roosevelt, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of Roosevelt's nomination for the vice presidency.[111] Roosevelt attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt: Roosevelt would accept the nomination if the convention offered it to him, but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for Roosevelt's nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Hanna at the convention to put Roosevelt on the ticket.[112] Roosevelt won the nomination unanimously.[113]

	Roosevelt proved highly energetic and an equal match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan's famous barnstorming style of campaigning. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, Roosevelt made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of the soldiers and sailors who fought and won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism, which would spoil America's innocence. Roosevelt countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. With the nation basking in peace and prosperity, the voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.[114][115]

	After the campaign, Roosevelt took office as vice president in March 1901. The office of Vice President was a powerless sinecure and did not suit Roosevelt's aggressive temperament.[116] Roosevelt's six months as Vice President were uneventful, and Roosevelt presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned.[117] On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters at the Minnesota State Fair: "Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far."[118]


could be one reason to assassinate McKinley--even if McKinley were imperialist, if they thought Roosevelt was more imperialist they'd want to replace McKinley with Roosevelt



https://noticiasmicrojuris.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/fea-gelpi_0311.pdf

opens up talking about imperialist trend in late 19th century in American expansionism, racist sentiments of U.S. senators

	...On Sept. 12, 1901, President William McKinley died after being shot days earlier at the Pan-American Trade Exposi- tion in Buffalo, N.Y. Vice President Theodore Roosevelt, former Rough Rider and hero of the Battle of San Juan Hill in Cuba during the Spanish-American War, succeeded him in office. Roosevelt also considered the inhabitants of the new American possessions inferior beings: “Besides acting in good faith, we have acted with good sense, and that is also important. We have not been frightened or misled into giving to the people of [Puerto Rico] a form of government unsuit- able to them. While providing that the people should govern themselves as far as possible we have not hesitated in their own interests to keep the power of shaping their destiny.” At the conclusion of his presidency, he also spoke about the Filipinos in a derogatory manner: “In our treatment of the Filipinos we have acted up to the highest standard that has yet been set at marking the proper way in which a powerful and advanced nation should treat a weaker people.” 


Roosevelt also racist and opposed self-government for U.S. territories after Spanish-American war.

	The highest court of the land, whose justices had decided Plessy v. Ferguson only years earlier (in 1896), added insult to injury. In a series of cases decided from 1901 to 1905—known as the “Insular Cases”—the U.S. Supreme Court constitutionally justified imperialist policy toward the territories of Hawai‘i, Puerto Rico, and the Phil- ippines. 5 From this point on, as a matter of “constitutional” precedent rather than congressional policy, the Northwest Ordinance was de facto repealed. In its place, the Court devised the doctrine of “territorial incorporation,” accord- ing to which two types of territories exist: incorporated territory, in which the Constitution fully applies and which is destined for statehood, and unincorporated territory, in which only “fundamental” constitutional guarantees apply and which is not bound for statehood.

	President Roosevelt clearly favored the Court’s imperialist groundwork. The initial Insular Cases, however, were decid- ed by a 5-4 plurality. When Justice Horace Gray retired, it became paramount for Roosevelt to fill the vacancy with a candidate who would uphold the Court’s precedent. Oliver Wendell Holmes was his man. Letters to and from Roosevelt to the U.S. senator from Massachusetts, Henry Cabot Lodge, are evidence of Holmes’ commitment to the Insular Cases policy as a condition of his appointment. Holmes joined the Court in 1902 and thereafter voted consistently with the majority in support of the doctrine. 


Roosevelt appointed someone who would keep ruling in favor of insular cases, which were winning by 5-4. Letters between Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge said to be evidence that Roosevelt appointed Holmes on condition of him being in favor of insular cases.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_Wendell_Holmes_Jr.
	On August 11, 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt nominated Holmes to a seat on the United States Supreme Court vacated by Justice Horace Gray, who had retired in July 1902 as a result of illness. The nomination was made on the recommendation of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, the junior senator from Massachusetts, but was opposed by the senior senator and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, George Frisbie Hoar. Hoar was a strenuous opponent of imperialism, and the legality of the annexation of Puerto Rico and the Philippines was expected to come before the Court. Lodge, like Roosevelt, was a strong supporter of imperialism, which Holmes was expected to support as well.[20] As a result of Hoar's opposition, there was a delay in the vote for confirmation, but on December 2, 1902, Roosevelt resubmitted the nomination and Holmes was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate on December 4, receiving his commission the same day. On the bench, Holmes did vote to support the administration's position favoring the annexation of former Spanish colonies in the "Insular Cases." However, he later disappointed Roosevelt by dissenting in Northern Securities Co. v. United States, a major antitrust prosecution;[21] the majority of the court, however, did rule against Holmes and sided with Theodore Roosevelt's belief that Northern Securities violated the Sherman Antitrust Act.[21] The dissent by Holmes permanently damaged his formerly close relationship with Theodore Roosevelt.


Holmes recommended to Roosevelt by Lodge. Roosevelt admin had "pro-Imperialism" policy. Holmes had "close relationship" with Roosevelt, but not a "loyal" supporter--supported him on insular cases but not on antitrust. 


https://noticiasmicrojuris.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/fea-gelpi_0311.pdf
	By virtue of this judicial constitutional fiat, the U.S. ter- ritories and their inhabitants have now for over a century been treated in an anomalously separate and unequal man- ner. For example, in 1901, the Court held that the Uniformi- ty Clause of the Constitution, which provides that “all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States” did not apply to unincorporated territories. After that, in 1903 and 1922, the Court held that citizens of the unin- corporated territories of Hawai‘i and Puerto Rico were not entitled to indictment by grand jury nor trial by jury, as these were not fundamental rights. Following in these footsteps, in 1924, the Puerto Rico Supreme Court, whose members themselves were presidential appointees at that time, went so far as to hold that the Nineteenth Amendment, which grants suffrage rights to women, was not a fundamental right. Hence, women in Puerto Rico were not entitled to vote at the time. In 1978 and 1980, the Insular Cases were again relied upon by the Supreme Court when it dismissed constitutional challenges against significant discrimination in Social Security and federal welfare programs to U.S. citizens residing in Puerto Rico.


relying on insular cases for past 100 years to arbitrarily decide citizens in U.S. "territories" don't have certain rights.

What's the point of that?


	...The inhabitants of Puerto Rico, by virtue of their 1917 Organic Act, likewise became U.S. citizens. However, in Balzac v. Porto Rico decided in 1922, the Supreme Court contrariwise held that this identical congressional act did not “incorporate” Puerto Rico. Justifying such illogical rul- ing, the Court, in a 9-0 opinion penned by Justice William Howard Taft (and 81-year-old Oliver Wendell Holmes, con- curring in the opinion), described the Filipinos and Puerto Ricans as “living in compact and ancient communities, with definitely formed customs and political conceptions . ” Justice Taft also concluded that “[Puerto Rico is a] distant ocean communit[y] of a different origin and language from those of our continental people.” 8 Taft was an offspring of American imperialist policy: a former U.S. President from 1909 to 1913, secretary of war from 1904 to 1908, and governor of the Philippines from 1901 to 1904. During his gubernatorial term, a major insurrection against American dominance broke out in the Philippines, and thousands of American soldiers lost their lives or were injured—hence, Taft’s distaste for the territorial populations.


Holmes and William Howard Taft used legal trickery and racist logic to keep screwing over Puerto Rico


author goes on to argue for Puerto-Rican statehood



...


https://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/theodore-roosevelt-reviews-race-relations-feb-13-1905-234938

https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/teddy-roosevelt-didnt-deserve-this/2017/10/27/beb79574-bb53-11e7-be94-fabb0f1e9ffb_story.html
	In the speech, he did abysmally refer to whites as a “forward race.” But the focus of his address was to echo Lincoln in calling strongly for the raising of minorities’ status, which Roosevelt correctly said would benefit the entire country.


Roosevelt racist, but I guess less racist than the racists of the time.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presidency_of_Theodore_Roosevelt

wiki article doesn't say much on his imperalist tendencies

Roosevelt for annexation of phillipenes, opposed self-government for Puerto Rico, wanted insular cases and appointed supreme court justice for this purpose:

http://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1652&context=ylpr

pg 20

	See TORRUELLA, supra note 43, at 62-84. Before nominating Oliver Wendell Holmes to the Court in 1902, President Roosevelt sought assurances that Holmes supported the Insular Cases' outcome; Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge responded that he would not have supported Holmes' nomination "unless he held the position [] describe[d]." G. EDWARD WHITE, JUSTICE OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES: LAW AND THE INNER SELF 234-37 (1993) (quoting correspondence).



also continued Phillipene American war?



------


https://history.sfsu.edu/sites/default/files/EPF/1991_John%20Davenport.pdf
	In our history, perhaps no single armed conflict has touched the collective soul of the American people as deeply as the war in Vietnam. In what became a multimedia event, the war in Indochina presented American soldiers in a new light. For the first time, it was thought, our troops were fighting a war of aggression, a war for empire. This empire however, was not a product of the 1960s, nor was it the denouement of the post-World War II realignment. Long before young soldiers found themselves fighting for their lives in places such as Khe Sanh and Da Nang, other young Americans had fought this nation’s first imperial war in Asia -- the Philippine Insurrection.

	From 1899-1902, the United States fought to extinguish the flame of independence which had flared in the Philippines following the defeat of Spain in the Spanish-American War. An aggressive newcomer on the imperial stage, America was a nation which had cut its teeth on a patrimony of “manifest destiny.” For many people in the United States, freedom and liberty emanated from our shores. Counted among this number was the energetic young governor from New York, Theodore Roosevelt. From his earliest appearance in the public limelight, Roosevelt expressed an abiding belief in the superiority of western culture and the rectitude of Western expansion, particularly the American variant. This belief shaped his personal and life profoundly and affected his conduct as President of the United States. Nowhere is this evinced more clearly than in his conduct of the American war in the Philippines between his assumption of power in 1901, and his declaration of the islands’ pacification in July 1902.


Davenport says Philippines-American war America's "first imperialist war," and compares to Vietnam. Roosevelt was involved since before becoming president.


	The month of March, 1899, saw American troops continuing an advance outwards from Manila which had begun a month earlier. Different readings of an agreement between the Filipinos and Americans, concerning guarantees of the former’s independence, had caused tensions which escalated to the point where a minor incident triggered a war. An American sentry fired on a Filipino patrol, and within days the Americans were driving the ill-equipped and poorly trained Filipinos away from their capital city into the surrounding countryside.


does Davenport sum up start of the war accurately? glossing over things a little. Was he right to do that?

misses weird details of start of war, a lot due to unusual decisions by General Otis--decided to edit McKinley's proclimation in a way that offended Filipinos (including making him "Governer of Phillipenes" instead of "Governer in Phillipenes"), and rejected Aguinaldo's offer for peace for basically no reason "fighting must go on to grim end."

Some of the Phillipenes under Aguinaldo also hoped to provoke a war, making Aguinaldo's offer and Otis' rejection all the more strange.

The details Davenport glosses over mostly make the U.S. look more shifty which would aide his argument about U.S imperialism. He also sums them up wrong: it wasn't "different readings," Otis edited the proclimation on his own. And it wasn't just a "Filipino patrol," they were trying to get the Americans to leave and provoke them. Otis rejecting the peace offer is also a major detail that changes the character of the start of the war from what is described here.


also wtf is this

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Philippines_(1898%E2%80%931946)#Outbreak_of_general_hostilities
	By June, U.S. and Filipino forces had taken control of most of the islands, except for the walled city of Intramuros. Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were able to work out a bloodless solution with acting Governor-General Fermín Jáudenes. The negotiating parties made a secret agreement to stage a mock battle in which the Spanish forces would be defeated by the American forces, but the Filipino forces would not be allowed to enter the city. This plan minimized the risk of unnecessary casualties on all sides, while the Spanish would also avoid the shame of possibly having to surrender Intramuros to the Filipino forces.[41] On the eve of the mock battle, General Anderson telegraphed Aguinaldo, "Do not let your troops enter Manila without the permission of the American commander. On this side of the Pasig River you will be under fire".[42]

	On August 13, with American commanders unaware that a ceasefire had already been signed between Spain and the U.S. on the previous day, American forces captured the city of Manila from the Spanish in the Battle of Manila.[43][44][45] The battle started when Dewey's ships bombarded Fort San Antonio Abad, a decrepit structure on the southern outskirts of Manila, and the virtually impregnable walls of Intramuros. In accordance with the plan, the Spanish forces withdrew while U.S. forces advanced. Once a sufficient show of battle had been made, Dewey hoisted the signal "D.W.H.B." (meaning "Do you surrender?),[46] whereupon the Spanish hoisted a white flag and Manila was formally surrendered to U.S. forces.[47]

	This battle marked the end of Filipino-American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos. This later led to the Philippine–American War,[48] which would prove to be more deadly and costly than the Spanish–American War.


------

Roosevelt was definitely pro-imperialist and more racist than some make him out to be:


http://www.theodore-roosevelt.com/images/research/speeches/trwhiteraces.pdf
	In the Soudan, Mahdism during the ten years of its unchecked control was responsible for the death of over half the population and meant physical and moral ruin, a fact which shoul d be taken into account by the perverted pseudo - philanthropy which fails to recognize the enormous advantages conferred by the English occupation of the Soudan, if not on the English themselves, certainly on the natives and on humanity at large. In the sam e way the Russian advance into Turkestan has meant the real advance in the well - being of the people, as well as the spread of civilization. In Natal the English found an empty desert; because of the peace they established it has filled up so densely with n atives as to create very serious and totally new problems. There have been very dark spots in the European conquest and control of Africa, but on the whole the African regions which during the past century have seen the greatest cruelty, degradation, and s uffering, the greatest diminution of population, are those where native control has been unchecked. The advance has been made in the regions that have been under European control or influence; that have been profoundly influenced by European administrators , and by European and American missionaries.



roosevelt some sort of racist imperialist, thinks Europeans ruling other countries is better for them.


	...Where the control is exercised brutally; where it is made use of merely to exploit the natives, without regard to their physical or moral well - being; it should be unsparingly criticised, and there should be resolute insistence on amendment and reform. But we must not, because o f occasional wrong - doing, blind ourselves to the fact that on the whole the white administrator and the Christian missionary have exercised a profound and wholesome influence for good in savage regions.


a racist viewpoint, and completely wrong (if it matters)--protocols of "zion," communism, holocaust and both world wars a European invention


	...In India we encounter the most colossal example history affords of the successful  administration by men of European blood of a thickly populated region. in another continent. It  is the greatest feat of the kind that has been performed since the bre ak - up of the Roman  Empire. Indeed, it is a greater feat than was performed under the Roman Empire.  Unquestionably mistakes have been made; it would indicate qualities literally superhuman if so  gigantic a task had been accomplished without mistakes. It is  easy enough to point out  shortcomings; but the fact remains that the successful administration of the Indian Empire by  the English has been one of the most notable and most admirable achievements of the white  race during the past two centuries. On the whol e it has been for the immeasurable benefit of  the natives of India themselves. Suffering has been caused in particular cases and at particular  times to these natives; much more often, I believe, by well - intentioned ignorance or bad  judgment than by any moral obliquity. 


where did he get this idea?


	But on the whole there has been a far more resolute effort to do justice, a far more resolute  effort to secure fair treatment for the humble and the oppressed during the days of English rule  in India than during any other period of recorded I ndian history. England does not draw a penny  from India for English purposes; she spends for India the revenues raised in India; and they are  spent for the benefit of the Indians themselves. Undoubtedly India is a less pleasant place than  formerly for the  heads of tyrannical states. There is now little or no room in it for successful  freebooter chieftains, for the despots who lived in gorgeous splendor while under their cruel  rule the immense mass of their countrymen festered in sodden misery.


Didn't the East India Company install a despot a few decades before this was written?


	But the mass of the people have been and are far better off than ever before, and far better off than they would now be if English control were overthrown or withdrawn. Indeed, if English control were now withdrawn from India, the whole peninsula would become a chaos o f bloodshed and violence; till the weaker peoples, and the most industrious and law - abiding, would be plundered. and forced to submit to indescribable wrong and oppression; and the only beneficiaries among the natives would be the lawless, violent, and blo odthirsty. I have no question that there are reforms to be advanced -- this is merely another way of saying that the government has been human; I have also no question that there is being made and will be made a successful effort to accomplish these reforms. But the great salient fact is that the presence of the English in India, like the presence of the English in Egypt and the Soudan, of the French in Algiers, of the Russians in Turkestan, of the Germans in Southwest Africa and East Africa (and of all these peoples, and of other white peoples, in many other places), has been for the advantage of mankind. 

	Every well - wisher of mankind, every true friend of humanity, should realize that the part  England has played in India has been to the immeasurable advantage of India, and for the  honor and profit of civilization, and should feel profound satisfaction in the stability and  permanence of English rule. I have seen many American missionaries who have come from  India, and I cannot overstate the terms of admiration  in which they speak of the English rule in  India, and of the incalculable benefits it has conferred and is conferring upon the natives.


why does he like English imperialism so much

kindof ironic coming from the president of a country famous for winning independence from English imperialism


	Finally, take our own experience in the Philippines. Spain finally lost power to be of benefit to  the islands; but do no t forget that Spain accomplished very, very much for them during more  than two centuries; and that the islands owe their present possibilities to the fact that the  Spaniards took possession of them. Then we came in. I am sure that when international history  is written, from the standpoint of acclaiming international justice, one chapter will tell with  heartiest praise what our people have done in the Philippines.


hmmmm



------


https://history.sfsu.edu/sites/default/files/EPF/1991_John%20Davenport.pdf

pg 3

	...Within this scheme, America held a unique position. America had not only a right, but a duty, to expand and share with the less “fortunate” of the world the civilization, peace, and liberty which were all by-products of its history. Without a doubt, Roosevelt declared, his countrymen could not “if they wish to retain their self-respect, refrain from doing their duty as a great nation.” 10 Nor did Roosevelt see this duty as something which could be accepted or rejected at will. The land of liberty had not asked for the responsibility of bestowing civilization upon its Asian charges, but like it or not, the former Spanish possessions were now ours. The force of American arms had won the Spanish war, now the United States was responsible for the future happiness and prosperity of the Philippines. Thus, “under no conceivable circumstances,” said Roosevelt, could we “turn [the Filipinos] over to rapine and bloodshed” or “allow them to sink into a welter of blood and confusion.”



http://www.theodoreroosevelt.org/site/c.elKSIdOWIiJ8H/b.9294911/k.C897/Index_P.htm
	Philippines—American Duty in the

	We may not wish the Philippines, and may regret that circumstances have forced us to take them; but we have taken them, and stay there we must for the time being— whether this temporary stay paves the way for permanent occupation, or whether it is to last only until some more satisfactory arrangement, whether by native rule or otherwise, takes its place. Discussion of theories will not avail much; we have a bit of very practical work to be done, and done it must be, somehow. (Outlook, January 7, 1899.) Mem. Ed. XII, 519; Nat. Ed. XI, 249.

	____________. If the men who have counseled national degradation, national dishonor, by urging us to leave the Philippines and put the Aguinaldan oligarchy in control of those islands, could have their way, we should merely turn them over to rapine and bloodshed until some stronger, manlier power stepped in to do the task we had shown ourselves fearful of performing. But, as it is, this country will keep the islands and will establish therein a stable and orderly government, so that one more fair spot of the world's surface shall have been snatched from the forces of darkness. Fundamentally the cause of expansion is the cause of peace. (1900.) Mem. Ed. XV, 289-290; Nat. Ed. XIII, 338.

	____________. In the Philippines we have brought peace, and we are at this moment giving them such freedom and self-government as they could never under any conceivable conditions have obtained had we turned them loose to sink into a welter of blood and confusion, or to become the prey of some strong tyranny without or within. The bare recital of the facts is sufficient to show that we did our duty; and what prouder title to honor can a nation have than to have done its duty? We have done our duty to ourselves, and we have done the higher duty of promoting the civilization of mankind. . . . We are not trying to subjugate a people; we are trying to develop them and make them a law-abiding, industrious, and educated people, and we hope ultimately a self-governing people. (At Minnesota State Fair, September 2, 1901.) Mem. Ed. XV, 337, 340; Nat. Ed. XIII, 477, 479.


Roosevelt apparently thought the U.S. had a duty guide Filipino's into self-government and that they couldn't do it themselves

in his writings, Roosevelt comes off as believing in self government while somehow simultaneously believing that certain people are incapable of self-government


https://history.sfsu.edu/sites/default/files/EPF/1991_John%20Davenport.pdf
	There probably would have been little argument from the future president over the characterization of the insurgents made by Elihu Root. In a Youngstown, Ohio speech given less than a month before the presidential election of 1900, the Secretary of War inveighed against the “haif-guerilla, half-bandit” Filipino insurgents who hindered the bestowal of “happiness, peace, and prosperity” which submission to American authority would ensure. 13 In fact,Roosevelt had welcomed the appointment of Root by William McKinley as a good first step toward putting down the insurrection. From his home in Oyster Bay, Roosevelt wrote Henry Cabot Lodge that “Root realizes that the first thing to do is smash the Philippine insurrection.” 14 Privately, Roosevelt admitted that while he hoped that, “the trend of events will speedily as may be justify us in leaving them,” he had, “never varied in my feeling that we had to hold the Philippines.


Roosevelt was committed to "smashing the insurgency" and holding the phillipenes since before he became president


	...The stage was set for the next act which would include as players an indignant President, a scheming general, and revelations concerning American war crimes. “I am deeply chagrined,” Roosevelt wrote Chaffee, “to use the mildest terms, over the trouble between yourself and Taft.” 20 friend to both men, the President was presented with a paradox which was eerily analogous to his own thinking. While he advocated expansion, it was to be mainly for the benefit of “savages;” while he believed that “we can ultimately help our brethren of the Philippine Islands,” 21 they must be taught “that we are the masters.” 22 Roosevelt’s confidence in Western expansion was predicated upon competing views of the objects of that expansion. It was easy enough to enunciate the value of expanding Christian virtue, white “civilization”, and American liberty, but what if your “barbarous neighbor” refuses the offer? The dispute between Chaffee and Taft forced Roosevelt to confront his own conflicting views concerning expansion.


a dispute over military or civilian law enforcement in the phillipenes said to have tested Roosevelt


	...In Washington, Roosevelt initiated his own investigation in the hopes of possibly insulating the army. When this became impossible, he attempted to justify the unjustifiable. He promised a crowd gathered in Arlington, Virginia, that he would make every effort “to find out every instance of barbarity on the pan of our troops.” Furthermore, he intended “to punish those guilty of [crimes] and take, if possible even stronger measures.. .to prevent the occurrence of all such instances in the future.” Privately, he stressed that while there had “been some blots on the record” of the army, his troops had been “exceedingly merciful.” He claimed that the soldiers fought under conditions which “were most exasperating.” Elucidating this point, Roosevelt stressed that the “enemy were very treacherous.”


soldiers committed war crimes, which appeared in the press. Roosevelt was incredulous and tried to defend the soldiers.

I guess he thought some reports were "fake news"?


	...Theodore Roosevelt’s beliefs shaped profoundly his conduct of the war from September 1901 to July 1902. He brought to the Office of President and the position of Commander-in-Chief a deep and abiding confidence in the virtue of the American people and the superiority of white, Western culture. The war for Roosevelt, had been a crusade to save the Filipinos from themselves, from the catastrophe of a non-American future. The war was over; the examination of what is meant and how America fought it, of which this essay is but one small part, had just begun.



------


http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/19/books/review/a-new-history-of-the-philippine-american-war.html
	To Roosevelt’s great frustration, McKinley was as reluctant to go to war as Roosevelt was eager. McKinley, who had been commended for his bravery during the battle of Antietam, wanted to be re-­elected, but he wanted nothing to do with war. “I have been through one war,” he said. “I have seen the dead piled up, and I do not want to see another.” When Senator Henry Cabot Lodge recommended Roosevelt for assistant secretary of the Navy, McKinley made the appointment hesitantly, guessing, rightly, that the young man would not give him a minute’s peace until he sent troops into battle. “I want peace,” he told another Roosevelt supporter, “and I am told that your friend Theodore . . . is always getting into rows with everybody.”

	Although Roosevelt moves in and out of Jones’s narrative, disappearing for long stretches, he still manages to steal the spotlight, just as he does in every book in which he appears. When McKinley dragged his feet before sending troops to Cuba, Roosevelt sneered that the president had “no more backbone than a chocolate éclair.” In the Department of the Navy, Roosevelt gleefully took over while his boss was on summer vacation, anointing himself the “hot weather secretary” and crowing to a friend that he was having “immense fun running the Navy.” In Cuba, after choosing his regiment of Rough Riders from 23,000 applicants, he ordered his famous charge up Kettle Hill wearing a custom-made fawn-colored Brooks Brothers uniform with canary-yellow trim.

	...What was intended, in McKinley’s mind at least, as an effort to help the Filipinos, ended up igniting a deep hatred of Americans. In the spring of 1902, Senator George Frisbie Hoar, who had argued against the war from the beginning, delivered an excoriating three-hour speech on the Senate floor that left the nation stunned and Roosevelt fuming. “You have wasted 600 millions of treasure. You have sacrificed nearly 10,000 American lives — the flower of our youth. You have devastated provinces. You have slain uncounted thousands of the people you desire to benefit,” he said. “Your practical statesmanship has succeeded in converting a people who three years ago were ready to kiss the hem of the garment of the American and to welcome him as liberator . . . into sullen and irreconcilable enemies, possessed of a hatred which centuries cannot eradicate.”

	In the end, “Honor in the Dust” is less about the freedom of the Philippines than the soul of the United States. This is the story of what happened when a powerful young country and its zealous young president were forced to face the high cost of their ambitions. There finally came a point, Jones writes, when even Theodore Roosevelt realized that “America’s dream of empire had passed.”


there's another reason they'd want Roosevelt over McKinley



------


http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2017/10/the_insular_cases_the_racist_supreme_court_decisions_that_cemented_puerto.html
	The Strange Case of Puerto Rico

	By Doug Mack

	...That year, McKinley won re-election on a platform that celebrated overseas expansion and referred to residents of the newly-acquired territories as “rescued peoples.” His successor, Theodore Roosevelt, was even more explicit in praising “the expansion of the peoples of white, or European, blood” into the lands of “mere savages.” It’s worth noting that President Trump has pointed to this period as the era “when we were great, when we were really starting to go robust.”

	Downes v. Bidwell was the codification of McKinley-Roosevelt mindset.


a little weird how Mack conflates McKinley and Roosevelt's mindset

they had different mindsets, with Roosevelt being more racist, expansionist and imperialistic, which is an important point since it points to a potential motive for the assassination of McKinley. According to "Honor in the Dust" McKinley and Roosevelt were often at odds, with Roosevelt being more aggressive.

anything unusual about Mack?


tough to believe this is anything but sincere:

http://blog.douglasmack.net/2017/01/a-letter-to-my-toddler-daughter-on-eve.html

maybe a bit too politicized, but sounds like he means it?


http://blog.douglasmack.net/2016/06/je-suis-glbtq.html
	I heard Orlando was under attack. I heard America was under attack.

	No. This wasn't about a particular place but a particular identity: the people at Pulse were targeted because they were gay. The GLBTQ community, specifically, is what was under attack. They were murdered because of who they love. We need to say it. Say it loud. Say it with agony: 49 PEOPLE KILLED IN GAY NIGHTCLUB BY HOMOPHOBIC GUNMAN WHO WANTED TO KILL GAY PEOPLE.

	Yes, the President said it; Hillary Clinton said it; I saw plenty of people on social media saying it. But still, not enough people said it. The message didn't seem to resonate.

	...You can't eradicate a sickness until you identify what it is and what it's doing. When you talk about solidarity, know exactly who needs your solidarity. Don't say you stand with Orlando. Say you stand with the GLBTQ community.

	If that makes you feel weird, remember how you added a French flag to your Facebook avatar after the Paris attacks last autumn, because even though you're not French, you wanted to express solidarity with a community under siege. Remember how you proclaimed "Je Suis Charlie" after the Charlie Hebdo murders, even though you're not a cartoonist--but you support free speech (even if it makes you kind of uncomfortable) and it's important to show your support for anyone targeted in such a way. 

	...I ended Sunday as I began: holding my daughter, weeping. Not just for the dead but for the living--particularly those who have the loudest, most powerful voices--who can't summon the basic decency to identify homophobia as a menace and to push back against it. 


comes off too strong attacking them for a mistake not as grave as the language he uses to condemn them, in a way that likely hurts his ostensible cause.

the bit on Charlie Hedbo weird since I thought that was active measures


http://blog.douglasmack.net/2013/09/an-open-letter-to-congressional.html

not seeing anything especially weird here, guess he's just passionately leftist

so far think his writings better explained by bias than intent to deceive


------


http://www.startribune.com/writings-of-theodore-roosevelt-called-for-preserving-nature/475747363/


press usually fans of Roosevelt? 


------


http://www.tribtoday.com/news/local-news/2018/02/despite-mckinleys-best-efforts-u-s-creeping-closer-to-war/
	At that time, rival publishers Joseph Pulitzer and Hearst in their newspapers attempted to persuade McKinley to send U.S. troops to the aid of Cuba.

	Public opinion on this matter ran high, with the public calling for troops to help Cuba, but McKinley didn’t want to get involved.

	His declaration, “Observe good faith and justice toward all nations (and) cultivate peace toward all” angered many, including McKinley’s Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Navy, Theodore Roosevelt.

	Roosevelt’s response was to refer to McKinley as having “no more backbone than a chocolate eclair.” Again, McKinley, ever the introspective leader, took this criticism in stride.

	On Feb. 15, 1898, the USS Maine, moored in Havana Harbor to protect U.S. citizens living in Havana, sank. Initial reports stated the Spanish launched a torpedo that sank the ship, but many decades later it was discovered this type of battleship had a flaw that caused minor explosions.

	Since the Maine carried ammunition, the minor explosion caused a major explosion, killing 266 U.S. sailors. The misinformation the yellow press spread about why the Maine sank, led the press to popularize the phrase “Remember the Maine, to hell with Spain!”

	Two days later, Hearst’s newspaper ran the following headline: “War Sure! Maine Destroyed by Spanish: This Proved Absolutely by Discovery of The Torpedo Hole.”

	Public sentiment grew that the U.S. should become involved in this conflict. Having been advised that U.S. troops needed more training, McKinley continued to bide his time until he knew the military was ready to intercede.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/on-leadership/wp/2015/08/31/if-not-for-a-mountain-what-is-president-mckinleys-legacy/
	If not for a mountain, what is President McKinley’s legacy?

	..."He tends to be stuck in the middle—not great but not terrible," said Brandon Rottinghaus, a political science professor at the University of Houston who did his own ranking last year. "The problem is this is where presidential legacies go to be forgotten," he said. The ones whose tenures were lukewarm are taught less often in schools and chronicled by fewer historians. "He's kind of victim to this sort of zone of forgotten presidents."

	He also suffers from directly preceding Theodore Roosevelt in office, standing in the shadow of a man thought to have started the modern presidency and widely considered both on the right and left as one of America's greatest presidents.

	...McKinley's presidency is often most remembered for two things: his 1896 election ushered in a period of Republican dominance, and he widely expanded the country's involvement in foreign affairs.

	...Yet how those milestones are viewed by history has shifted significantly over the years. While he was remembered favorably in the years right after his death—McKinley is one of the four presidents to be assassinated in office—his reputation later fell, aided in particular by those who considered him an imperialist.


funny McKinley gets torn down for being imperialist while Roosevelt gets praised


	Up until the 1960s, Gould said, McKinley was seen as a weak president, manipulated by those around him, too easily pushed into foreign involvement. "There was one famous little quip that he had the backbone of a chocolate eclair," Gould said.

	But then a historian named L. Wayne Morgan wrote a book in the 1960s that asserted McKinley was a better leader than many realized, and Gould followed with a book in the early 1980s that argued McKinley was the first modern president, not Roosevelt. As the University of Virginia's Miller Center on the presidency writes on its Web site: "He is now viewed as a President who tried mightily to avoid war ... who acted decisively when all the diplomatic cards had been played, and who asserted great presidential authority over his cabinet and generals."


why did the view on McKinley shift? first liked shortly after death, then ignored or called weak or imperialist, then decided not so bad after all in 60's

	McKinley broke with many precedents, historians say. In the past, presidents didn't speak directly with the public on policy issues and didn't campaign on behalf of their fellow party members or themselves. McKinley did both. He was talking about leaving the continental United States to visit Hawaii and Puerto Rico before his death, Gould said, something no president had done in office before.


McKinley would have been better


------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/on-leadership/wp/2015/08/31/if-not-for-a-mountain-what-is-president-mckinleys-legacy/

	Some presidents have their names placed on schools, or airports, or highways. William McKinley's name graced a mountain—the tallest in North America, no less.

	Not any more. On Monday, Barack Obama officially renamed Alaska's Mount McKinley, returning the giant peak to the original name of Denali, or "great one," given to it by the Athabascan people. McKinley, a former Ohio governor who was president at the end of the 19th century, was originally given the honor by a gold prospector who liked his support of the gold standard. The name stuck, though it has been a source of debate for years. 


https://www.politico.com/story/2011/12/obama-channels-tr-069834

	Obama channels TR

	By EDWARD-ISAAC DOVERE

	... Obama acknowledged those comparisons during his speech, noting to laughter that Roosevelt “was called a radical, a socialist, even a communist. But today, we are a richer nation and a stronger democracy because of what he fought for in his last campaign.” 

	... Obama already has the Nobel Peace Prize that it took Roosevelt two terms to get, and they share a disdain for the media — or what Roosevelt called “slanderous mendacity for hire, and whose one purpose, as far as I am concerned, is to invent falsehood and to distort truth.” 


funny


------

http://www.theodore-roosevelt.com/images/research/speeches/trwhiteraces.pdf
	THE EXPANSION OF THE WHITE RACES

	...in our treatment of the Filipinos we have acted up to the highest standard that has yet been set as marking the proper way in which a powerful and advanced nation should treat a weaker people. 

	...in this sense primarily self - control, self - restraint, and if those qualities do not exist -- that is, if the people are unable to govern themselves -- then, as there must be government somewhere, it has to come from outside. 

	...believe that I am speaking with historic accuracy and impartiality when I say that the American treatment of and attitude toward the Filipino people, in its combination of disinterested ethical purpose and sound common sense, marks a new an d long stride forward, in advance of all steps that have hitherto been taken, along the path of wise and proper treatment of weaker by stronger races.


Roosevelt believed in "weaker" and "stronger" races and that some people might not be able to govern themselves.


Roosevelt comes of as buying the arguments employed to justify imperialism (like this https://www.encyclopedia.com/science/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/social-darwinism-emerges-and-used-justify-imperialism-racism-and-conservative-economic-and-social)

roosevelt said to have been exposed to social darwinism in education and espoused those views: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2708402?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents


also wtf

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_White_Man%27s_Burden
	"The White Man's Burden: The United States and the Philippine Islands" (1899), by Rudyard Kipling, is a poem about the Philippine–American War (1899–1902), in which he invites the United States to assume colonial control of that country.


Kipling being the guy who wrote the famous book on "the great game" and thought it was a jolly good time


http://www.theodore-roosevelt.com/images/research/speeches/trwhiteraces.pdf
	...Bishop Hartzell's work has been done in Africa, the continent in which of all others there has  been the most need for Christian work, and in which that work shows signs of reaching its  widest development. It h as been indeed a Dark Continent, and some of the white men who  have gone thither have by their acts deepened the gloom. Let us as a race be thankful that so  many other men have gone thither to strive for the uplift of the people; to strive for the  betterme nt of conditions. Our own country has in the past committed grave wrong against  Africa for which it should amply atone, and no better atonement can be made than that which  is being made by the American missionaries of every creed and church, who are now do ing so  much in almost every corner of Africa for the physical, the intellectual, and the moral  betterment of the people. I hope there will be the most hearty support of these men, who in  far - off regions are fighting for progress in things of the spirit no  less than in things of the body.  Let us help them to make the missions centres of industrial no less than of ethical teaching; for  unless we raise the savage in industrial efficiency we cannot permanently keep him on a high  plane of moral efficiency, nor y et can we render him able to hold his own in the world.


creepy

Roosevelt kindof comes off as brainwashed

"let us as a race be thankful"--why even say that?

it's like he's a guy who really believes some sort of theory of social darwinism (or something like "race realism" to give modern analogy) but he's trying to be ethnical or nice about it in the confines of his ideology


	...The twentieth century will see and is now seeing the transformation of Africa into a new world. Within a few years, its vast domain has been partitioned among various European nations.  These nations are expending enormous sums of money and utilizing their best statesmanship  and colonizing abilities in the development of colonial empires of wide extent and extraordinary  material possibilities. ...The wealth of the commerce which will be developed cannot be estimated. The white man rules; but there is only one white man on the continent to one hundred others, who are either barbaric black heathen or fanatical Mohammedans.


sounds pretty racist to me


	Self - interest and competition will, I believe, unite in making the governments fair to the people,  and the indomitable energy of the adventurous settlers and the wealth of the nations behind  them will result i n exploiting the vast commercial resources of the continents.


a little social darwinist?

in same essay goes on about how Christianity necessary to enlighten savages around world

	...The responsibility of America toward Africa is emphasized because of our past history, and  because of the number of our citizens who are of African descent. As a result of the African  slave - trade, the crime of the ages, and of  two and a half centuries of slavery in America, the  United States has nearly ten millions of colored people as a part of its citizenship. No other  country outside of Africa has so large a negro population; and, what is more, there are no other  ten millions of negroes in the world who own as much property and have as large a per cent,  who are intelligent, moral, and thrifty. The education and uplift of the American negro now  going forward should be accompanied by the increase of the missionary and Christian  forces on  the continent from which his ancestors came. The number of those who go as missionaries to  Africa will increase; and it is not unreasonable to suppose that a large share of the leadership  for the evangelization of the continent will be furnished  from among our own colored leaders in  America.


I guess he really believed in his "uplifting races" thing

at least he was better than Hitler?


http://jewishcurrents.org/tag/teddy-roosevelt/
	In 1920, Bryan signed “The Perils of Racial Prejudice,” a statement (co-signed by President Woodrow Wilson, former Presidents Taft and Roosevelt, W.E.B. DuBois, and Clarence Darrow) decrying Henry Ford’s anti-Semitic screed, The International Jew.


Roosevelt not in agreement with Ford


http://www.jpost.com/Christian-News/Today-in-History-Teddy-Roosevelt-and-the-Jews-439591
	Today in History: Teddy Roosevelt and the Jews
	TR believed that it is "entirely proper to start a Zionist state around Jerusalem." 

	...In 1899, his support was so high amongst Jewish Republican supporters that they printed Yiddish flyers for Roosevelt’s gubernatorial campaign alluding to his and the Rough Riders’ (which included many Jewish soldiers) victory over Spain in the Spanish-American War as revenge for the 1492 expulsion of Jews from Spain. 


huh


	...An unpopular notion at the time, TR stood out in his later years as an ardent Zionist. He had visited the Jews in Ottoman Palestine as a teenager in 1873 with his family, and Roosevelt wrote a diary of his trip, which included his observations of the Jews’ prayer at the Western Wall.

	...Roosevelt said that “‘It seems to me that it is entirely proper to start a Zionist state around Jerusalem,’ for peace would only happen if Jews were given Palestine.”



http://www.thephora.net/forum/showthread.php?t=38147
	This is an intriguing book, written by Roosevelt around September 1917 - few months after America had entered war against Germany and two months before Bolshevik takeover in Russia. He wrote it mainly to harangue America to get more efficient in its warfare, and considered American Socialists acting as tools of Germany - like Lenin's gang at that point really was doing.

	The foes of our own household [1917]

	http://www.archive.org/details/foeso...hous00roosuoft

	This book shows how Socialist ideas were already greatly "in the air" even in America at that point - an ideological threat Roosevelt felt necessary to counter. He curiously anticipates many anti-Communist arguments to be employed in decades to follow.

	... (Roosevelt also attacks feminism and birth controllers in this book.)


Roosevelt also anti-Communist by Russian revolution, wrote a book about it

not like Ludendorff, doesn't blame it on Jews or cite the protocols

makes argument that it was a German plot


https://archive.org/stream/foesofourownhous00roosuoft/foesofourownhous00roosuoft_djvu.txt
	This pro-German, anti-American propaganda has been carried on for years prior to the war, and its treasonable activities are performed systematically to-day. The great majority of the men and women of German blood, are absolutely good Americans, and we owe it just as much to them as to the rest of our fellow countrymen with the utmost severity to suppress the tens of thousands of Germans and German-Americans who, having taken the oath of allegiance, yet intrigue and con- spire against the United States and do their utmost to promote the success of Germany and to weaken the de- fense of this nation. These men support and direct the pro-German societies. They incite disloyal activities among the Russian Jews. They finance the small groups of Irish- Americans whose hatred for England makes them traitors to the United States. They foment seditious operations among the German-American socialists and the I. W. W.'s. They support the German-language peri- odicals. Their campaigns range from peace movements and anti-draft schemings to open efforts in favor of sedi- tion and civil war.

	...In exactly the same fashion it may be set down as  certain that continuance of the present craven policy of  ignoring sedition and paltering with treason will en-  courage and aid German autocracy, and will be trans-  lated either into terrible lists of Americans slain and  crippled on the battlefield or else into an ignoble peace  which will leave Germany free at some future time to re-  sume its Campaign against America and against liberty-  loving mankind.


I guess he saw subversive activites, "Russian Jews" and I.W.W. as a German plot


	APPENDIX E 
	THE HUN WITHIN OUR GATES 

	The Hun within our gates is the worst of the foes of 
	our own household, whether he is the paid or the un- 
	paid agent of Germany. Whether he is pro-German or 
	poses as a pacifist, or a peace-at-any-price man, matters 
	little. He is the enemy of the United States. Senators 
	and Congressmen like Messrs. Stone, La Follette and 
	Maclemore belong in Germany and it is a pity they 
	cannot be sent there


saw a wide conspiracy that included Congressmen, but blamed on Germans


	...Our Government has 
	seemed afraid to grapple with these people. It is per- 
	mitting thousands of allies of Berlin to sow the seeds of 
	treason and sedition in this country. The I. W. W. 
	boasts its defiance of all law, and many of its members 
	exultingly proclaim that in their war against industry in 
	the United States they are endeavoring to give the Gov- 
	ernment so much to do that it will have no troops to spare 
	for Europe. Every district where the I. W. W. starts 
	rioting should be placed under martial law, and cleaned 
	up by military methods.


can see why they'd like him

did he realize anarchists and IWW types put him in power?


http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/06/opinion/06bradley.html
	In June 1905, Roosevelt made world headlines when — apparently on his own initiative — he invited the two nations to negotiate an end to their war. Roosevelt’s private letter to his son told another story: “I have of course concealed from everyone — literally everyone — the fact that I acted in the first place on Japan’s suggestion ... . Remember that you are to let no one know that in this matter of the peace negotiations I have acted at the request of Japan and that each step has been taken with Japan’s foreknowledge, and not merely with her approval but with her expressed desire.”


should look into what he was up to here--Russo-Japanese war important to Okhrana


-------


Lodge a suspicious character


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Cabot_Lodge
	Henry Cabot Lodge (May 12, 1850 – November 9, 1924) was an American Republican Congressman and historian from Massachusetts. A member of the prominent Lodge family, he received his PhD in history from Harvard University. He is best known for his positions on foreign policy, especially his battle with President Woodrow Wilson in 1919 over the Treaty of Versailles. The failure of that treaty ensured that the United States never joined the League of Nations.


contributed to U.S. not being in League of Nations?


	...During the presidency of Woodrow Wilson, Lodge advocated entrance into World War I on the side of the Entente Powers. He became Chairman of the Senate Republican Conference and Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, emerging as the leader of the Senate Republicans. He led the opposition to Wilson's Treaty of Versailles, proposing twelve reservations to the treaty. He most strongly objected to the provision of the treaty that required all nations to repel aggression, fearing that this would erode Congressional powers and commit the U.S. to burdensome obligations.


right to oppose Versailles treaty, but maybe not the right way to go about it...

where Republicans against Versailles due to partisanship?


	...The summit of Lodge's Senate career came in 1919, when as the unofficial Senate majority leader, he dealt with the Treaty of Versailles. He wanted to join the League of Nations with reservations. The Democrats in the Senate, following Wilson's direction, rejected Lodge's proposal to join the League with reservations. Republicans opposed joining under Wilson's terms of no reservations which meant the League could force the U.S. to enter a war without approval of Congress. In the end the U.S. never joined the League of Nations.[22] Lodge won in the long run—his reservations were incorporated into the United Nations in 1945, where the U.S. was given a veto.[23]

	Lodge's key objection to the League of Nations was Article X. It required all signatory nations to repel aggression of any kind if ordered to do so by the League. Lodge rejected an open-ended commitment regardless of relevance to the national security interests of the United States. He especially insisted that Congress must approve. Lodge was also motivated by political concerns; he strongly disliked President Wilson[24] and was eager to find an issue for the Republican Party to run on in the presidential election of 1920.


wikipedia offers partisan concerns as motive for Lodge's opposition to Article X in League of Nations


	...The Senate was divided into a "crazy-quilt" of positions on the Versailles question.[26] It proved possible to build a majority coalition, but impossible to build a two thirds coalition that was needed to pass a treaty.[27] One block of Democrats strongly supported the Versailles Treaty. A second group of Democrats supported the Treaty but followed Wilson in opposing any amendments or reservations. The largest bloc, led by Lodge, comprised a majority of the Republicans. They wanted a Treaty with reservations, especially on Article X, which involved the power of the League of Nations to make war without a vote by the United States Congress. Finally, a bi-partisan group of 13 "irreconcilables" opposed a treaty in any form. The closest the Treaty came to passage was in mid-November 1919, when Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-Treaty Democrats, and were close to a two-thirds majority for a Treaty with reservations, but Wilson rejected this compromise. Cooper and Bailey suggest that Wilson's stroke on September 25, 1919, had so altered his personality that he was unable to effectively negotiate with Lodge. Cooper says the psychological effects of a stroke were profound: "Wilson's emotions were unbalanced, and his judgment was warped....Worse, his denial of illness and limitations was starting to border on delusion."[28] The Treaty of Versailles went into effect but the United States did not sign it, and made separate peace with Germany and Austria-Hungary. The League of Nations went into operation, but the United States never joined. Historians agree that the League was ineffective in dealing with major issues, but they debate whether American membership would have made much difference.[29] 


would more American involvement have made a difference? the onerousness of Versaille is often attributed to European grudges--a mediator like U.S. might have helped prevent that.

It looks like the political chaos under Wilson and Lodge precluded more American involvement at Versaille?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty_of_Versailles#American_aims
	Before the end of the war, President Woodrow Wilson put forward his Fourteen Points, which represented the liberal position at the Conference and helped shape world opinion. Wilson was concerned with rebuilding the European economy, encouraging self-determination, promoting free trade, creating appropriate mandates for former colonies, and above all, creating a powerful League of Nations that would ensure the peace. He opposed harsh treatment of Germany but was outmanoeuvered by Britain and France. He brought along top intellectuals as advisors, but his refusal to include prominent Republicans in the American delegation made his efforts seem partisan, and it contributed to a risk of political defeat at home.[39]


maybe worth looking into, and if/how Lodge contributed



------


tentative assessment: Okhrana (or whatever you call them) wanted to discredit anti-imperialist ideas of America's founding, and sought to shape the U.S. into being no different from European imperialist powers of the time. Toward this end they assassinated McKinley and replaced him with Roosevelt, whose ideas and policies amounted to the subjugation of the Philippines, Puerto Rico and other "non-incorporated territories."



------


interesting pattern


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_A._Garfield
	Civil rights and education

	Garfield believed that the key to improving the state of African American civil rights would be found in education aided by the federal government.[153] During Reconstruction, freedmen had gained citizenship and suffrage that enabled them to participate in government, but Garfield believed their rights were being eroded by Southern white resistance and illiteracy, and was concerned that blacks would become America's permanent "peasantry."[154] He answered by proposing a "universal" education system funded by the federal government. Congress and the northern white public, however, had lost interest in African-American rights, and federal funding for universal education did not find support in Congress during Garfield's term.[154] Garfield also worked to appoint several African Americans to prominent positions: Frederick Douglass, recorder of deeds in Washington; Robert Elliot, special agent to the Treasury; John M. Langston, Haitian minister; and Blanche K. Bruce, register to the Treasury. Garfield believed that Southern support for the Republican party could be gained by "commercial and industrial" interests rather than race issues and began to reverse Hayes's policy of conciliating Southern Democrats.[155] He appointed William H. Hunt, a carpetbagger Republican from Louisiana, as Secretary of the Navy.[155] To break the hold of the resurgent Democratic Party in the Solid South, Garfield took patronage advice from Virginia Senator William Mahone of the biracial independent Readjuster Party, hoping to add the independents' strength to the Republicans' there.[156]



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chester_A._Arthur#Civil_rights
	Civil rights

	Like his Republican predecessors, Arthur struggled with the question of how his party was to challenge the Democrats in the South and how, if at all, to protect the civil rights of black southerners.[171] Since the end of Reconstruction, conservative white Democrats (or "Bourbon Democrats") had regained power in the South, and the Republican party dwindled rapidly as their primary supporters in the region, blacks, were disenfranchised.[171] One crack in the solidly Democratic South emerged with the growth of a new party, the Readjusters, in Virginia.[172] Having won an election in that state on a platform of more education funding (for black and white schools alike) and abolition of the poll tax and the whipping post, many northern Republicans saw the Readjusters as a more viable ally in the South than the moribund southern Republican party.[172] Arthur agreed, and directed the federal patronage in Virginia through the Readjusters rather than the Republicans.[172] He followed the same pattern in other Southern states, forging coalitions with independents and Greenback Party members.[172] Some black Republicans felt betrayed by the pragmatic gambit, but others (including Frederick Douglass and ex-Senator Blanche K. Bruce) endorsed the administration's actions, as the Southern independents had more liberal racial policies than the Democrats.[173] Arthur's coalition policy was only successful in Virginia, however, and by 1885 the Readjuster movement began to collapse with the election of a Democratic president.[174]

	Other federal action on behalf of blacks was equally ineffective: when the Supreme Court struck down the Civil Rights Act of 1875 in the Civil Rights Cases (1883), Arthur expressed his disagreement with the decision in a message to Congress, but was unable to persuade Congress to pass any new legislation in its place.[175] Arthur did, however, effectively intervene to overturn a court-martial ruling against a black West Point cadet, Johnson Whittaker, after the Judge Advocate General of the Army, David G. Swaim, found the prosecution's case against Whittaker to be illegal and based on racial bias.[176] The administration faced a different challenge in the West, where the LDS Church was under government pressure to stop the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory.[177] Garfield had believed polygamy was criminal behavior and was morally detrimental to family values, and Arthur's views were, for once, in line with his predecessor's.[177] In 1882, he signed the Edmunds Act into law; the legislation made polygamy a federal crime, barring polygamists both from public office and the right to vote.[177]



http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1879648_1879646_1879694,00.html
	Chester A. Arthur

	21st President, 1881-85

	Chester Arthur was one of five Presidents who was never elected — he took office after James Garfield's assassination and served nearly a full term.

	His political rise took place in the not-quite-squeaky-clean New York political machine, where he had a reputation for cronyism and allegedly demanded kickbacks from workers to support the Republican Party. So he shocked many observers by becoming a reformer in office, ushering in the civil-service commission to crack down on the rampant spoils system. Even Mark Twain said it would be "hard to better" his Administration.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_James_A._Garfield
	Garfield was carried back to the White House. Although doctors told him that he would not survive the night, the President remained conscious and alert.[37] The next morning his vital signs were good and doctors began to hope for recovery.[38] A long vigil began, with Garfield's doctors, led by D. Willard Bliss, issuing regular bulletins that the American public followed closely throughout the summer of 1881.

	...Doctors continued to probe Garfield's wound with dirty, unsterilized fingers and instruments, attempting to find the location of the bullet.[43] Alexander Graham Bell devised a metal detector specifically for the purpose of finding the bullet lodged inside Garfield. He was unsuccessful, partly because Garfield's metal bed frame made the instrument malfunction, and partly because Bliss allowed Bell to use the device only on Garfield's right side, where Bliss insisted the bullet had lodged.[44] Bell's subsequent tests indicated that his metal detector was in good working order, and that he would have found the bullet had he been allowed to use the device on Garfield's left side.[45]

	...historians and medical experts now believe that Garfield probably would have survived his wound had the doctors attending him been more capable.[54][55] Unfortunately for Garfield, most American doctors of the day did not believe in anti-sepsis measures or the need for cleanliness to prevent infection.[56] Several inserted their unsterilized fingers into the wound to probe for the bullet, and one doctor punctured Garfield's liver in doing so. Also, self-appointed chief physician D. Willard Bliss had supplanted Garfield's usual physician, Jedediah Hyde Baxter. Bliss and the other doctors who attended Garfield had guessed wrong about the path of the bullet in Garfield's body. They had erroneously probed rightward into Garfield's back instead of leftward, missing the location of the bullet but creating a new channel which filled with pus.



https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/films/garfield/
	For many Americans, James Garfield represented not only an American's capacity to rise up in the world, but also the larger notion of what they believed the Union had fought for—equal opportunity for all men, black or white. With his death, many feared that vision died. But instead of Garfield's vision dying with him, his death brought together the American public in a way they had not been united since well before the Civil War.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_A._Garfield
	Legacy and historical view

	For a few years after his assassination, Garfield's life story was seen as an exemplar of the American success story—that even the poorest boy might someday become President of the United States. Peskin noted that, "In mourning Garfield, Americans were not only honoring a president; they were paying tribute to a man whose life story embodied their own most cherished aspirations."[208] As the rivalry between Stalwarts and Half-Breeds faded from the scene in the late 1880s and after, so too did memories of Garfield. Beginning in 1882, the year after Garfield's death, the U.S. Post Office began issuing postage stamps honoring the late president. Despite his short term as president, nine different issues were printed over the years.[196] In the 1890s, Americans became disillusioned with politicians, and looked elsewhere for inspiration, focusing on industrialists, labor leaders, scientists, and others as their heroes. Increasingly, Garfield's short time as president was forgotten.[209]

	The 20th century saw no revival for Garfield. Thomas Wolfe deemed the presidents of the Gilded Age, including Garfield, "lost Americans" whose "gravely vacant and bewhiskered faces mixed, melted, swam together."[210] The politicians of the Gilded Age faded from the public eye, their luster eclipsed by those who had influenced America outside of political office during that time: the robber barons, the inventors, those who had sought social reform, and others who had lived as America rapidly changed. Current events and more recent figures occupied America's attention: according to Ackerman, "the busy Twentieth Century has made Garfield's era seem remote and irrelevant, its leaders ridiculed for their very obscurity."[210]

	Garfield's biographers, and those who have studied his presidency, tend to think well of him, and that his presidency saw a promising start before its untimely end. Historian Justus D. Doenecke, while deeming Garfield a bit of an enigma, chronicles his achievements, "by winning a victory over the Stalwarts, he enhanced both the power and prestige of his office. As a man, he was intelligent, sensitive, and alert, and his knowledge of how government worked was unmatched."[211] Yet Doenecke criticizes Garfield's dismissal of Merritt in Robertson's favor, and wonders if the president was truly in command of the situation even after the latter's confirmation.[212] According to Caldwell, writing in 1931, "If Garfield lives in history, it will be partly on account of the charm of his personality—but also because in life and in death, he struck the first shrewd blows against a dangerous system of boss rule which seemed for a time about to engulf the politics of the nation. Perhaps if he had lived he could have done no more."[213] Rutkow writes, "James Abram Garfield's presidency is reduced to a tantalizing 'what if.'"[209]




After Lincoln assassinated got Andrew Johnson, after Garfield got Aurthur, after McKinley got T Roosevelt, after Kennedy got Lyndon B Johnson


pattern in all of these is the assassinated one is a good president with pro-American views, replaced by corrupt president with racist views.

Lincoln and Johnson is starkest example, A. Johnson undid a lot of Lincolns plans for reintegration and basically set up segregation and racism for next 100 years

Garfield had plans for civil rights and education which Aurthur skipped or half-assed

Roosevelt was racist and imperialist and started America's "imperialist" foreign policy

L. Johnson was racist and an asshole, not sure what he did in comparison to what Kennedy would have done


All of these also have in common weird things accompanying the assassination, like involvement of prominant anarchist figures in McKinley assassination, doctor killing Aurthur, or that cop killing Lee Harvey Oswald.


In press, Aurthur is ignored, but both Roosevelt and L Johnson were exalted by press despite serious faults.

