

http://www.wou.edu/history/files/2015/08/Sam-Dollarhide1.pdf


"pope Gregory VII did great things for separation of church and state" as he overthrows secular government using church


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=BNxKAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA129&lpg=PA129&dq=the+saxon+rebellion&source=bl&ots=Up5XB2Q2Yg&sig=5ea2dtW2vyAXWQZaC3R7peRUIgU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjoj_iYmbnaAhWNnFkKHUiRD1g4ChDoAQg5MAU#v=onepage&q=the%20saxon%20rebellion&f=false

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Harvey_Robinson


anything up with this guy?


------



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Leeson


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trial_by_ordeal
	According to a theory put forward by economics professor Peter Leeson, trial by ordeal may have been effective at sorting the guilty from the innocent.[41] On the assumption that defendants were believers in divine intervention for the innocent, then only the truly innocent would choose to endure a trial; guilty defendants would confess or settle cases instead. Therefore, the theory goes, church and judicial authorities could routinely rig ordeals so that the participants—presumably innocent—could pass them.[42] To support this theory, Leeson points to the great latitude given to the priests in administering the ordeal and interpreting the results of the ordeal. He also points to the overall high exoneration rate of accused persons undergoing the ordeal, when intuitively one would expect a very high proportion of people carrying a red hot iron to be badly burned and thus fail the ordeal.[41]


not sure but should look into this guy

a certain type of psycopath would get something out of getting people to believe in trial by ordeal again


------


http://time.com/4981316/friday-13th-knights-templar-post-truth/


not sure but should look into this



------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rollo

http://stevesroyalfamilies.blogspot.co.uk/2016/08/rollo-duke-of-normandy.html


is this an old wikipedia article on Rollo?


from old article:

	Flodoard explicitly states that Charles granted Rollo and his men the city of Rouen and a number of dependent districts around the coast.[29] Charles was overthrown by a revolt in 923, and his successor, Robert of Neustria, was killed by the Vikings in 924; his successor, Ralph, conceded the Bessin and Maine to Rollo shortly afterwards.[30] Subsequent analyses of the region's place names reveal Scandinavian settlements stretching from the Seine valley to the coast, and from Rouen to Dieppe. However, compared to settlements along eastern England (especially East Anglia and Yorkshire), the appearance of Norse elements in place names was far from widespread or entrenched. The occurrence of the Gallo-Roman suffix "-ville" after Norse names is evidence for this.[31] Around these territories, Normandy emerged, with Rollo and his men gradually adopting the pre-existing administrative and ecclesiastical boundaries they inherited: the archbishopric of Rouen and the traditional civil province, or pagus.


latest article:

	After pledging his fealty to Charles III as part of the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, Rollo divided the lands between the rivers Epte and Risle among his chieftains, and settled with a de facto capital in Rouen.[27]

	Charles was overthrown by a revolt in 923, and his successor, Robert I, was killed by the Vikings in 923. His successor, Ralph, conceded the Bessin and Maine to Rollo shortly afterwards, the chronicler Flodoard tells us.[28]

	Rollo died sometime between a final mention of him by Flodoard in 928


why does new article have less information? Old article tells how Normondy under rollo came about.


also differ on this (from old article):

	Rollo was alive but frail in 927, when his son is recorded doing homage to King Ralph. His exact death date is not known, but he was certainly dead by 933 and most historians approximate the year of his demise to 928.[32]


old article more pushy on Rollo being from Norway

also mentions the opinions of this guy "Douglas" a lot

old article has more info on Rollo attackign people and getting concessions:

	There are only one or two contemporary mentions of Rollo.[25] The earliest record is from 918, when an act of Charles the Simple mentions that he conceded land to "Rollo and his associates" for "the protection of the kingdom."[25] The chronicler Flodoard records that Robert of the Breton March waged a campaign against the Vikings, who nearly levelled Rouen and other settlements; eventually, he conceded "certain coastal provinces" to them.[24] Dudo retrospectively stated that this pact took place in 911 at Saint-Clair-sur-Epte; this was roughly the time when the Vikings suffered a defeat at Chartres and the Frankish king, which may have prompted them to negotiate. David Crouch concludes that although probable, it is impossible to verify this;[26] however Douglas agreed with Flodoard's account in the History of the Church at Rheims: after the defeat at Chartres, the Normans formed a pact with Charles and converted to Christianity. He argued that Charles the Simple's plan to invade Lorraine would have also contributed to his willingness to negotiate a settlement in the north.[27][28]



old article:

	Dudo records that Rollo took Popa (or Poppa), a daughter of Berenger, Count of Rennes, as a wife and with her had their son and Rollo's heir, William. It is impossible to verify this[37] and Douglas dismissed it.[38] Dudo also records that Charles the Simple gave one of his daughters, Gisela, in marriage to Rollo, but Douglas considers this in the "highest degree improbable".[39] Douglas accepts a story from an Icelandic saga that, while in Scotland, Rollo married a Christian woman and had a daughter, Kathleen; according to the sagas, she married a Scottish King called Beolan, and had at least a daughter called Nithbeorg, who was taken captive by and married to Helgi Ottarson.[40]Another daughter, Gerloc or Adele, who married William III, Duke of Aquitaine,[41] was identified by Dudo (who does not name the mother)[42] and accepted by Crouch as a daughter of Rollo and Popa,[43] an identification made by William of Jumieges in the latter-half of the 11th century.[44]


current article only mentions Gisela in sidebar:

	Spouse 	Poppa of Bayeux
	Gisela of France (intended, but unconfirmed)


"Douglas accepts a stroy from an Icelandic saga" maybe a clue


sign of a wikipedia fight?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Rollo

talk page contents include:

7 Let's try a vote
	7.1 Include both the theory that Rollo was Rolf the Ganger and the theory that he was a Danish person.
		7.1.1 Comments
	7.2 Only include the theory that Roll was Danish as all others are rubbish
		7.2.1 Comments

	...13 Danish town of Faxe, fakse, fasge or fauske

	...15 Highly biased

"Still kicking to Rollo" on the "Is Rollo from Norway or Denmark" debate

says inconsitencies with association with Hrolf, Dudo access to Rollo family while Icelandic authors centuries later, "maybe he just wanted Rollo to be icelandic", fleeing to Scania close to denmark, spoke same language as Danes not the same as Norway language, then ends with "That Rollo had orgin in Fakse, was remembered in Normandy in 1911, when major Haxthausen of Fakse was invited to the to the big Millenium Festivals in Rouen, as a representative of Rollo´s native soil."

Do some Danish people want Rollo to be Danish?

https://www.thelocal.no/20160302/was-viking-ruler-rollo-danish-or-norwegian
	Norwegian researches opened a tomb containing the remains of descendants of Viking leader Rollo in Normandy, France on Monday with the aim of putting an end to a centuries-long debate: was Rollo Danish or Norwegian?
	Norwegian researchers opened a tomb containing the remains of descendants of Viking leader Rollo in Normandy, France on Monday with the aim of putting an end to a centuries-long debate: was Rollo Danish or Norwegian?
	 
	“We have worked on investigating this for about seven years, so to finally obtain material that we can test for DNA is huge,” historian Sturla Ellingvåg told NTB. 
	 
	Rollo was the founder and first ruler of Normandy, the Count of Rouen and the great-great-great grandfather of William the Conqueror, the first Norman King of England. While Norwegian-Icelandic history holds that Rollo is the same man also known as Ganger Hrólf and hails from Norway, some Danish historians claim that Rollo is from Denmark. 


some patriotic skin in the game?

if studied how Rollo got his territories, might not fight as bitterly...

	... “Finding teeth is key, because DNA can be found there even after this many years. Two forensic experts from Norway and Denmark took five teeth that will now be sent to the University of Oslo and the Centre for GeoGenetics at the University of Copenhagen for analysis,” Ole Bjørn Fausa, the founder of one of the project’s sponsors, the Samlerhuset Group, said. 
 
	Only when the analysis is complete will Danish and Norwegian historians be able to settle their conflicting claims on Rollo.

	... Fausa said that if Rollo is confirmed to be Ganger Hrólf, it will have great historical significance. 
 
	“If the British royal family originates from the northern part of Western Norway, it will change the perception that the Norwegian royal family is relatively young with origins from the British and Danish royal houses,” he said. 


https://forum.paradoxplaza.com/forum/index.php?threads/was-rollo-norwegian-or-danish-pdox-has-the-answer.696636/

https://larsbrownworth.com/blog/2010/03/30/was-hrolfr-granger-rollo/
	Believe it or not this was a question of such fierce debate in the early 20th century that it spilled into national newspapers and became the subject of several angry diatribes.  1911 was the 1,000th year anniversary of the founding of Normandy and there was much Scandinavian pride in this native son made good.  The trouble was that no one was exactly sure where Rollo came from and both Denmark and Norway claimed him.  Norway especially was proud of its distinct national character (they had just broken away from Sweden in 1905) and wasn’t about to let Denmark steal their thunder.


why is this a thing?

other quotes from the talk page:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Rollo
	Here is some qoutes from Dudo of Saint-Quentin´s “De moribus et actis primorum Normannie Ducum”

	This one i think many Danish scholar are familiar with:

	Just send ambassadors to them to find out what they themselves say." Then Ragnold: "Go swiftly, we pray, to find out their purpose." Anstign replied: "I will not go alone." On the contrary, they sent with him two warriors skillful in the Dacian language. Coming upon the riverbank, they stood still, saying: "Counts of royal power command you to say who you are, and whence you have come, and what you are planning to do." Truly they replied: "We are Danes. Carried here from Dacia (Denmark), we have come to take Francia by assault." Yet they: "What authority does your lord discharge?" They replied: "None, for we men are of equal power."

	Here he say that was from Dacia himself, and NOT Iceland.

	Read it here. http://www.the-orb.net/orb_done/dudo/11-conquest

	...Vilhelm of Jumièges is a monk from Normandy writed it about 1070. (also before Orkneyinga Saga FROM ICELAND! were writed).

	From Vilhelm of Jumièges: Guillaume de Jumièges Gesta Normannorum.

	Quote: The father sends him (the son) to the city Bayeux, and gave him to his “commander” to learn Danish (Danica) language. Under the protection of Boso. So he could give his –from the outcountrys, the right answars. [ut ibi lingua eruditus Danica, suis exterisque hominibus sciret apte dare responsa]”

	from the same text.

	Rollos reputation was so great that king Harald of Denmark (Harald Klak) (Danorum rex) flied to Normandy with 60 ships after his brother Sven had taken the power in Denmark. The mighty and noble duke (Rollo) Received Harald with glory and gave him the province of Coutances until he was strong enough to return and retake the lost realm.

	That is also drawed on the The Bayeux Tapestry.

	That tells about those who arrived in Normandy were Danes. Harald Klak was also in front in 815, in a big sea battle. When the Franks for the first and only time tryed to invade Jutland, Denmark. There isn´t made a Harald Klak page yet.


apparently, a fight between Norwegian and Danish patriots has invaded Rollo's wikipedia article

goes on:

	...>>>>Conclusion: Rollo is from Denmark. -most likely Fakse, Zealand.<<<<


	Ofcouse no one can proof anything like we can´t proof that Neil Armstrong was the first man on the Moon. But there is surely alot more proof and give alot more sence that Rollo was from Denmark , and not from a island far away. There is also evidens for that the Danes had conflics with the Francians in that time, and centuries before. Look at Danevirke etc.


	In the old town Fakse (Today known as Faxe, after the Faxe brawery) in Zealand, Denmark, ca. 35 km. South-west from Copenhagen. Is there a monument for Rollo. Called Rollostenen (The Rollo stone). Also a School called Rolloskolen (The Rollo school).


	The National-museum in Denmark have a temporary exhibition about The Bayeux Tapestry. The exhibition also shows those old founds in Denmark from Normandy. And alot of Anglo-saxon coins (over 30.000 i think). And also cites as proof of it, that Denmark was a big trading partner with Normandy, witch also agrees with Dudo.

	http://www.nationalmuseet.dk/sw20385.asp


I call bullshit

"Ofcourse no one can proof anything like we can't proof that Neil Armstrong was the first man on the moon"

trashing wiki talk page in broken english and ending everything with links to .dk sites and assertions of proud Danish heritage

Didn't Internet Research Agency do things similar to this? they had trolls pretending to be American "patriots" and taking piss out of them

The Internet Research Agency trolls also had a frequent tactic of inflaming debates

probably no way to know if trolls or not, better use of time to read the historical sources


more from talk page:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Rollo
	
    Your conclusion is hardly ok. It is based upon certain assumptions that in my opinion are a bit dubious to say the least. It seems as though you use the sources to back up an already made conclusion.

    1. You seem to claim that Snorre is an unreliable source compared to Dudo. 

    ...As far as I know, Dudo and other authors on wich you base your conclusion, are generally known for their fantastic tales.

    I'd say your claim is totally backwards - Snorre is the more reliable one. 

    ...2. You try hard to find evidence for your conclusion.

    First of all, you claim that Dane=person from Denmark and Dacia=Denmark.

    First question: What did "Dane" mean? "Dane" meant Scandinavian. 

    Next question: Where was Dacia? Dudo writes that Dacia - Rollo's place of birth - was "protected by very high alps." Norway is full of mountains. Denmark has none. 


fighting over which soruce more reliable, Denmark vs Norway fight again

quoting above in a wiki talk fight:


	...This is actually a funny statement as the article contradict it self, and show how ignorant some Norwegians are over for Norwegian History. On the Jelling stones from the late 900´s it say clearly that Harald Bluetooth invaded South Norway (Viken).

	...And acording to the saga litterature Rollo was from Møre. Rollo is the latin name for Hrolf. There is no mentioning of Rollo in any danish sources, but several in the icelandic sagas and the Orkneyingar saga...strange that such a prominant "dane" wouldnt be mentioned in Saxo Grammaticus. No norwegian would remove the danish theory, however allot of danes seems to want to remove the norwegian claim. That is nationalism my friend.

	Let's try a vote

	As a vote is one of the steps on Wikipedias policy on resolving disputes I would like to suggest one. Add your four~ under the solution you support.
	Include both the theory that Rollo was Rolf the Ganger and the theory that he was a Danish person.

	But why a vote? What is wrong this, it´s tells about both theorys!

	--Comanche cph 14:18, 26 June 2006 (UTC)

	...I do NOT agree with the pro-Icelandic fairytale. But that´s not the issue here. We have a article tells about both theories of the Duke of Normandy. But it seems like many Norwegians in here, like you, don´t wanna accept that. --Comanche cph 16:13, 26 June 2006 (UTC)


if they don't write English perfectly, how do they write the Wikipedia article?

	
	...Mattamatikk: I havent yet figured out how to replay on talk, so ill write here. You cant say all other theories are rubbish. Dacia was also a name used to describe all of Scandinavia, not only Denmark. Besides, Dudo says Rollos birthplace was surrounded by high mountains...there are no mountains in Denmark. The french sources say he was from Fakse, however this could easily be Fauske witch is in Møre & Romsdal, the place the Icelandic sagas claim Rollo was from. Fauske is surrounded by high mountains. In most ways, the description Dudo gives fits Norway better.


current article:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rollo
	Benoît also repeated the claim that Rollo had been persecuted by a local ruler and had fled from there to "Scanza island", by which Benoît probably means Scania (Swedish Skåne). While Faxe was physically much closer to Scania, the mountainous scenery of "Fasge", described by Benoît, would seem to be more like Fauske.


I guess the mountains thing made it in there, in one form or another


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Rollo

"More saga-based info pertaining to Rollo's origins is included, with sources" has a long argument between two editors

	...Until now, there has been information based on the medieval sagas in this segment of the article. No sources have been provided, however. Now a little more info from the sagas has been added - not even contradicting the old info - and appropriate sources have been included.

    The source which you want not used lists related historical accounts and historian and quotes and views from them. Just because findings of some historians or texts in some historical accounts do not support your view of ancient history does not justify you to remove the works in question from Wikipedia.

    Take for instance Professor Emeritus Kyösti Julku. He is one of the utmost respected experts on the European ancient history and details relating to the Viking Age as well. Please explain precisely why he or any other source used should not be used.

    ...My objection to your allegations of me having a personal bias is based on this policy, as you accuse the editor of ulterior motives instead of discussing the subject at hand.

    ...You are still presenting a theory of Ynglinge-heritage by juxtapositing various primary sources. The Hversu Noregr byggðist doesn't "show...


some debates getting personal? fighting over sources


	...The various heroic figures presented in the medieval accounts are interpreted in various ways by historians, some as mythological and others as figures who possibly may have existed, despite of some figures in some cases having been likened to "gods" (compare to Russian tsars, Stalin and Kim Jong Il being likened to gods by many of their followers in more recent history).


some of the people apparently mythical figures? Wiki article on Gisela says she was a "fictional princess"

If trolls, I wonder if some of these editors actually believe what they're saying? All you have to do is tell them there's some great grand conspiracy...


	...Did Dudo and Benoist de Sainte-Maure claim that Rollo was from "Fasge", "Faxe" or "Fakse"? And i see the author of the article identifies Fakse with Faxe in Denmark. Well, he should also include the fact that it could be Fauske in Norway. Fauske is, unlike Faxe in Denmark, surrounded by "high alps". Fauske is a place in Møre, witch the Icelandic sagas claim Rollo hailed from.


talk page explains a lot about how Rollo's wiki article got the way it was

thought it was weird first time reading it


	...Highly biased

	I think this section is biased towards danish origin:

	"Rollo was a powerful Viking leader of contested origin. Dudo of Saint-Quentin, in his De moribus et actis primorum Normannorum ducum,[3] tells of a powerful Danish nobleman at loggerheads with the king of Denmark, who had two sons, Gurim and Rollo; upon his death, Rollo was expelled and Gurim killed. William of Jumièges also mentions Rollo's prehistory in his Gesta Normannorum Ducum, but states that he was from the Danish town of Fakse. Wace, writing some 300 years after the event in his Roman de Rou, also mentions the two brothers (as Rou and Garin), as does the Orkneyinga Saga.

	Norwegian and Icelandic historians identified Rollo instead with Ganger Hrolf (Hrolf, the Walker), a son of Rognvald Eysteinsson, Earl of Møre, in Western Norway, based on medieval Norwegian and Icelandic sagas. The oldest source of this version is the Latin Historia Norvegiae, written in Norway at the end of the 12th century. This Hrolf fell foul of the Norwegian king Harald Fairhair, and became a Jarl in Normandy. The nickname "the Walker", "Ganger" in Norse, came from being so big that no horse could carry him.

	Geoffrey of Malaterra, in his The Deeds of Count Roger of Calabria & Sicily & of Duke Robert Guiscard his brother claims Rollo "sailed boldly from Norway".[4]

	The question of Rollo's origins was a matter of heated dispute between Norwegian and Danish historians of the 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly in the run-up to Normandy's millennium anniversary in 1911. Today, the debate continues."


"teach the controversy"? except if you cave to that everyone is left confused...


    ...A: Origins: The origins of Rollo have been endlessly disputed. Norway and Denmark both claim him. The claim by Norway is based on an identification of Rollo with a character in the 13th-century Icelandic saga, Ganger-Hrólf. No early source from the Normans themselves refers to Rollo as Ganger-Hrólf, or even as plain Hrólf. It is an assumption that Rollo was a Latinisation of Hrólf. Nor is there any suggestion in Dudo of Rollo being too tall to ride, which is the characteristic which apparently gave Ganger-Hrólf his nick-name. So the identification of Rollo with Ganger-Hrólf is scarcely straightforward. It is certainly true that modern historians have tended to favour the identification, despite the fact that historians normally give greatest weight to sources closest in time and place to the event in question. Wikipedia could make that point, and I did indeed do so in my attempted clean-up. But that does not mean that Wikipedia should treat it as fact - not even if another encyclopedia does so. :) Genie (talk) 18:15, 24 August 2016 (UTC)

    B: Sources: The article at present relies heavily for interpretion on a single secondary source, Douglas 1942. It also cites another secondary source, Crouch 2002, where a primary source should in preference be used. It is normal practice for professional historians to cite primary sources as far as possible e.g. if a charter is mentioned, the citation should be to a work in which the charter is published in full. For interpretation of primary sources, a professional historian will use his or her own judgement, but will be expected to be aware of the most recent scholarship on the matter from other academics, and will often credit these authors. In Wikipedia we do not indulge in original thinking. So the correct procedure is to follow the most recent scholarship on the matter in question, citing sources and beng careful to avoid bias. There is therefore no reason to cite Douglas 1942 at all. I have to disagree with Ânes-pur-sàng in his desire to see a book from 1839 cited either. There are plenty of more recent works on the Vikings. :) Genie (talk) 18:15, 24 August 2016 (UTC)

    C: Speculation: The article at present states as fact in its opening sentence that Rollo was christened Robert. We don't know that. This seems to have been a speculation by Crouch 2002. The suggestion might be mentioned later on in the article, making the argument for the suggestion clear and citing its source, but speculation should be clearly distinguished from fact. Genie (talk) 19:15, 24 August 2016 (UTC)


explains the bits about Douglas in old article?

Why does he think Rollo be christened Robert was speculation and not from primary source? Dudo said christened Robert, but decided was speculation from Crouch in 2002

points out that modern historians usually rely on primary sources over secondary sources, but don't in the case of Dudo, the only primary source on Rollo's life

Why do modern historians trash Dudo?

Might not be true that we get better at understanding history over time. Did Nazis get better understanding of history after Hitler took power? Soviets after revolution?


	...Style of article

	I had read the article last month and found little of substance about the subject "Rollo", there was a lot about opinions of different historians and many comments about items that could not be confirmed, which is hardly surprising considering how long ago he lived. I added a number of items from an 1839 book about the life of Rollo (Duncan, Jonathan (1839). The Dukes of Normandy from the time of King Rollo to the expulsion of King John. Joseph Rickerby and Harvey & Darton.). User:Genie has since deleted all but one reference to the book I had posted and the article has again reverted to little of substance about the subject. No explanation has been given for the deletion of cited information.

	The Biography section has almost nothing about his time before France and almost nothing about his time in France. There is almost more about Rollo in the article Charles the Simple. 

	...Can we please have something about Rollo and his life in the article, with suitable short comments by various historians if the disagree and with just a covering brief statement that almost nothing can be verified. Ânes-pur-sàng (talk) 14:24, 7 September 2016 (UTC)

	...As I said earlier in the discussion of this page, it really would not help to add speculation from an historian published in 1839. If we cite secondary sources, we should use *recent* ones, reflecting *modern scholarship*. Next to nothing can be verified about Rollo's life, as you say. So let's stick to facts that can be confirmed, or at least are acknowledged by modern scholars to be reasonable deductions. Genie (talk) 14:34, 7 September 2016 (UTC)

	I am quite happy with using more modern scholars works, provided there is actually something in the article about Rollo, rather than about the scholars and their disputes/speculation, because at the moment it is very uninformative and boring to read. Ânes-pur-sàng (talk) 15:22, 7 September 2016 (UTC) 

	I understand that readers would prefer a detailed and colourful biography to the few reliable facts we actually have. But where are we to get a detailed and colourful story? Make it up? Use the delightfully colourful story written in Iceland 300 years after the death of Rollo? The most reliable sources will be those closest in time and place to the life of Rollo. They are few. Genie (talk) 22:34, 7 September 2016 (UTC) 


Dudo's story is pretty interesting

still calling bullshit


	...Are you saying that every writer makes up the stories, if so, I would agree with you, the victor normally writes the history, the same applies to last weeks events, however even if two people agree, it does not mean it is the truth. Something about Rollo has to be written and I think it is better to say something with comments from historians that agree, suggest an alternative, or disagree, than nothing at all


"teaching the controversy" at work, I guess



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=d480AAAAMAAJ&pg=PA111&lpg=PA111&dq=las+Casas+memorial&source=bl&ots=CRE0knPOHH&sig=7Zpd1vnmbGIcJpBDVDpZKNYFttI&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjaxrTO8-DaAhVhnuAKHWIDD_Y4ChDoAQhKMAk#v=onepage&q=las%20Casas%20memorial&f=false

hates on Las Casas a bit too much, seems like some people got it out for him