

https://www.politico.com/story/2015/08/is-lockheed-martin-too-big-too-fail-121203
	Is Lockheed Martin too big to fail?

	Lockheed has made itself dominant on Capitol Hill – with defense jobs in virtually every state.

	By LEIGH MUNSIL and AUSTIN WRIGHT

	Lockheed Martin, the Pentagon’s largest and most diverse contractor, already nabs nearly 10 cents of every contract dollar and has long perfected the strategy of spreading jobs on weapons programs in key states and congressional districts.

	Now its recent agreement to buy helicopter manufacturer Sikorsky Aircraft for $9 billion — its biggest acquisition in nearly two decades — represents not only an expansion into a new area of defense: It would also lock down one of the last remaining pieces in its already unrivaled political map.

	...But as Lockheed continues to move into even more types of defense procurement and grows a political network that is already the envy of its competitors, some worry it means the Pentagon will have less and less leverage if its wants to terminate or even scale back one of its signature programs for technical or cost reasons.

	“Lockheed Martin looks like a classic case of a company that is too big to fail,” said William Hartung, senior fellow at the Center for International Policy and author “Prophets of War,” a recent history of the company which paints an unflattering portrait of the world’s biggest defense firm.




https://www.amazon.com/Prophets-War-Lockheed-Military-Industrial-Complex/dp/1568586973
	Prophets of War recounts the fascinating and often-frightening history of America's largest military contractor as well as its role in the formation of foreign policy.

	The company has produced spy satellites; helped the Pentagon collect personal data on U.S. citizens; provided interrogators for employment at Guantanamo Bay; manufactured our highest-tech aircraft; and more. It has also been embroiled in numerous scandals — from bribing officials in the Netherlands, Italy, and Japan in exchange for the purchase of Lockheed airplanes in the 1970s, to the provision of 600 toilet covers and 7,000 coffee makers to the Pentagon in the 1980s.


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lockheed_bribery_scandals
	Lockheed bribery scandals

	The Lockheed bribery scandals encompassed a series of bribes and contributions made by officials of U.S. aerospace company Lockheed from the late 1950s to the 1970s in the process of negotiating the sale of aircraft.[1]

	The scandal caused considerable political controversy in West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Japan. In the U.S. the scandal nearly led to the downfall of the corporation

	...In late 1975 and early 1976, a sub-committee of the U.S. Senate led by Senator Frank Church concluded that members of the Lockheed board had paid members of friendly governments to guarantee contracts for military aircraft.[3] In 1976, it was publicly revealed that Lockheed had paid $22 million in bribes to foreign officials


Church broke the story?


	...In September 1976, in the final phase of the West German federal election, the controversy was re-opened when questions were asked about the whereabouts of the "Lockheed documents" within the Federal Ministry of Defence. Anonymous sources also distributed several, possibly falsified, documents to the media.

	...In March 1976, in a protest at the scandal, actor Mitsuyasu Maeno made a suicide attack on Kodama's Tokyo home by crashing a light aircraft onto it. Maeno died and two servants were injured. Kodama himself was unharmed.

	...Prime Minister Joop den Uyl ordered an inquiry into the affair, while Prince Bernhard refused to answer reporters' questions, stating: "I am above such things".[18] The results of the inquiry led to a constitutional crisis in which Queen Juliana threatened to abdicate if Bernhard was prosecuted. Bernhard was spared, but had to step down from several public positions and was forbidden to wear his military uniforms again.[17]

	Prince Bernhard always denied the charges, but after his death on December 1, 2004, interviews were published showing that he admitted taking the money.[17] He said: "I have accepted that the word Lockheed will be carved on my tombstone."[19]

	...Lockheed chairman of the board Daniel Haughton and vice chairman and president Carl Kotchian resigned from their posts on February 13, 1976. The scandal also played a part in the formulation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act which President Jimmy Carter signed into law on December 19, 1977, which made it illegal for American persons and entities to bribe foreign government officials.


sounds like this was a big deal



http://www.atimes.com/article/lockheed-scandal-40-years-downfall-prime-minister-kakuei-tanaka/
	Lockheed Scandal 40 years on: The downfall of Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka
	Did the US government use the Lockheed bribery scandal four decades ago as a means to get rid of Japan's Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka? 


	...Upon learning that the U.S. government had become aware of its overseas bribes, Lockheed was shaken to its foundations. In late August 1975, immediately after ELGB’s staff visited Lockheed’s headquarters in California, Lockheed’s vice president and treasurer committed suicide.

	...However, the U.S. government was torn over whether to make public the names of the foreign officials. Meantime, the Church committee was also looking into bribery cases involving US corporations in Europe and the Middle East.

	...“The first discovery was that the middleman was former war criminal, Yoshio Kodama. We did research at the Library of Congress and went to the National Archives to have records of the Tokyo International Military Tribunal and people who investigated him.

	“That was really astonishing. An American corporation hired a former war criminal and bribed the Prime Minister of a major country, an important U.S. ally. And Kodama had ties with the yakuza and was involved with so many dirty things across the board. How did this guy get into the Japanese political structure? But until then, nobody, including ruling party politicians, questioned it.”


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/KODAMA,%20YOSHIO%20%20%20VOL.%201_0003.pdf
	Yoshio Kodama, notorious since the 1920's for his connections with right-wing and under- world groups, is widely reported to have high-level connections  in  the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). He has been described by many sources as a powerful figure in behind-the- scenes political maneuvering and one of the real "strong men" in present-day Japan. Allegedly, he has been visited at his residence by cabinet ministers and even Prime Minister Sato. He was reported to have had a close relationship with the late Ichiro Kono, one-time LDP contender for the Prime Ministership, and former LDP vice president Bamboku Ono, both of whom had somewhat unsavory reputations.

	An outspoken nationalist, Kodama believes Japan should erase the "shame" of being protected by another country, but he considers the Sato government incapable of removing the United States protection. In early  1968,  in conversation with a business associate, Kodama made some predictions concerning the Japanese political scene. Following the extension of the US-Japan Security Treaty in 1970, Kodama said that there will be anit- American demonstrations which will bring about the downfall of the Japanese government.


http://www.nytimes.com/1976/03/01/archives/westchester-weekly-5-japanese-had-key-roles-in-pushing-lockheed.html
	Yoshio Kodama, a behindthe‐scenes power broker who is regarded as one of Japan's most powerful men, was named as Lockheed's secret agent in Japan, and said to have had a hand in all the concern's dealings here since 1958. Mr. Kodama, who is now 65 years old, has been unavailable for comment. His doctors say he is too ill to make an appearance.

	...Since the beginning of the month, interviews with Japanese and American aviation executives and Government officials, plus the record of hearings of the United States Senate subcommittee on multinational corporations and of the ??? Parliament, have dis??? that:

	Lockheed's allies in Japan included the pilot who planned the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor; an American of Japanese ancestry who lost his United States citizenship during World War ???; an ultranationalist publisher purged by the Allied occupation, and a Member of Parliament who was later convicted of embezzlement.

	...Lockheed's secret agent, Mr. Kodama, is a chunky man who walks with the gait of a sailor, and his language is hard‐hitting and unadorned. He operated the so‐called “Kodama Agency” in China during World War II, obtaining intelligence and vital materials for the Japanese Imperial forces.


http://www.atimes.com/article/lockheed-scandal-40-years-downfall-prime-minister-kakuei-tanaka/
	Henry Kissinger

	Did the Church committee know that Tanaka, the former prime minister, was among the bribe recipients? With a vigorous nod of his head, Blum continued.

	“We discovered a number of things in the countries that were investigated, but important point was that there was nothing of the magnitude of Japan. It was a payoff to the highest level of the Japanese government, not a third-world country.”

	Meantime, Lockheed didn’t just stand by and watch. It knew that if the investigation continued and it was publicly linked with bribing named foreign government officials, the company could be dealt a mortal blow. So it sought help from a major figure in the Ford Administration — Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger.

	The letter read, in part: “… due to the extreme sensitivity of some of the information involved, Lockheed would prefer at least initially to describe orally some of the documents should you or any representative you may designate desire to verify the seriousness of the problem.”

	Nine days later, Secretary Kissinger wrote to the U.S. Attorney General, warning against making committee findings public as disclosure of names of foreign officials might have grave consequences for foreign relations.

	...The flashpoint in Washington that ignited the Lockheed scandal not only exposed the machinations of Yoshio Kodama and the crimes by multinational corporations and a prime minister, it also revealed the corruption that was rampant in the mainstream conservative establishment that had ruled Japan since the end of the war.

	As such, the Lockheed Incident still ranks as Japan’s biggest scandal of the postwar era.


http://factsanddetails.com/japan/cat16/sub110/item1761.html
	Left Wing Activism in Japan and Anti-American Demonstrations

	In the 1960s and 70s, there were anti-American demonstrations led by students who opposed to Japan's security arrangement with the United States and the use of American bases in Japan for the war in Vietnam.

	In 1968, protests were held at 150 universities and violence spilled into the streets. The University of Tokyo was shut down for almost a year and didn't reopen until 8,500 club-wielding police burst into a university building and arrested 256 activists.

	In the 1960s and 70s there were bomb attacks on industrial targets by left-wing groups. In 1974, left-wing radicals bombed a Mitsubishi Heavy Industries building, killing eight people and injuring 380 others. 

http://www.nytimes.com/1976/11/21/archives/japans-watergate-made-in-usa-japan.html?_r=0
	The public censure cuts across political lines. “Progressive” social critics characterize Lockheed as a typical product of a sick capitalist system; some right‐wing ultranationalists have excoriated Yoshio Kodama, the secret Lockheed representative, for covertly selling out the national interest to foreigners.


did Kodama get the "anti-American demonstrations" he wanted?


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Paperclip
	Operation Paperclip was a secret program of the Joint Intelligence Objectives Agency (JIOA) in which more than 1,600 German scientists, engineers, and technicians, such as Wernher von Braun and his V-2 rocket team, were recruited in post-Nazi Germany and taken to the U.S. for government employment, primarily between 1945 and 1959; many were former members and some were former leaders of the Nazi Party.

	...National Interest/Project 63: Job placement assistance for Nazi engineers at Lockheed, Martin Marietta, North American Aviation, and other aeroplane companies, whilst American aerospace engineers were being laid off work.


weird things going on with Lockheed and image problems early on


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=cfqbL9nHyVAC&pg=PA29&lpg=PA29
	Lockheed Martin has done everything from supplying interrogaters for U.S. military prisons at Guantanamo Bay

http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/03/AR2007010301759.html
	New allegations of detainee abuse at Guantanamo Bay released by the FBI on Tuesday put private contractors at the center of interrogation operations, raising questions once again about where they fit in the military's chain of command.

	The FBI's disclosures, which are based on eyewitness reports, refer several times to contractors directing the Army's interrogation efforts at the military detention center in Cuba. In at least one case, FBI agents were told that detainees may have been mistreated on orders from a contractor.

	...In the FBI documents, one agent described a 2002 incident involving a "civilian army contractor, who was in charge of the Army's interrogators." The agent reported being shown a bearded detainee with duct tape covering much of his head. Asked about it, the contractor "laughed and stated that the detainee had been chanting the Koran and would not stop," the documents said.

	The same agent said his primary contact was a "civilian contractor employed by the military, who was responsible for the interrogations," the documents said. The contractor "directed military reservists who conducted the interrogations of the detainees."

	...Another agent reported seeing detainees in Delta Camp in sweltering rooms as loud rap music played. The agent was told the treatment had been ordered by military contractors, according to an FBI summary of the documents. 

	The disclosures, which are based on a 2004 survey of FBI personnel, do not mention which company employed the contractors at Guantanamo. Many of the incidents dated to 2002, but it could not be learned yesterday what company held the contract for some of that time. In November 2002, Affiliated Computer Systems was awarded a contract to supply 30 intelligence analysts and 15 to 20 interrogators and strategic debriefers to Guantanamo. ACS was acquired by Lockheed Martin, the Pentagon's largest contractor, in 2003.

	"During our period of performance at Guantanamo, our employees were under the direct authority of" the U.S. Southern Command, said Lockheed spokesman Tom Jurkowsky. "We had no authority to, nor did we, direct the actions of any military member, active or reserve."


------

https://www.thenation.com/article/only-the-pentagon-could-spend-640-on-a-toilet-seat/
	The Classic $640 Toilet Seat

	Despite the tens of billions being wasted on a project like the F-35, the examples that tend to draw the most attention from the media and the most outrage among taxpayers involve overspending on routine items. This may be because the average person doesn’t have a sense of what a fighter plane should cost, but can more easily grasp that spending $640 for a toilet seat or $7,600 for a coffee pot is outrageous. These kinds of examples—first exposed through work done in the 1980s by Dina Rasor of the Project on Military Procurement—undermined the position taken by President Ronald Reagan’s administration that not a penny could be cut from its then-record peacetime Pentagon budgets. 

	The media ate such stories up. Pentagon overpayments for everyday items generated hundreds of articles in newspapers and magazines, including front-page coverage in The Washington Post. Two whistleblowers were even interviewed on the Today Show, and Johnny Carson joked about such scandals in his introductory monologues on the Tonight Show. Perhaps the most memorable depiction of the problem was a cartoon by The Washington Post’s Herblock that showed Reagan Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger wearing a $640 toilet seat around his neck. This outburst of truth-telling, whistleblowing, investigative journalism, and mockery helped put a cap on the Reagan military buildup


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1985/02/05/now-the-600-toilet-seat/917c98b4-c2fc-40a5-808b-87ff4e5884c8/
	Now, the $600 Toilet Seat 

	Sen. William S. Cohen (R-Maine) charged yesterday that the Navy has been paying more than $600 each for toilet seats, which he said "gives new meaning to the word 'throne.' "

	The Navy calls the item a "toilet cover assembly," and Lockheed-California Co. concluded after a recent review that it was only modestly overpriced.


http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1985-02-05/news/8501070733_1_toilet-seat-pentagon-lockheed
	It Cost $600, But It`s Not Just Any Toilet Seat

	WASHINGTON — As Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger sat at a table next to Gen. John Vessey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and while Sen. Barry Goldwater (R., Ariz.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, gazed out at the committee hearing room packed with reporters, Sen. William Cohen dropped his bomb.

	``I understand,`` the Maine Republican said, ``that there is a story coming out about a $600 toilet seat.``

	...According to Nick Duretta of Lockheed`s public information office, there is a difference between a toilet seat and the lavatory cover purchased for P-3 patrol planes that are now out of production.

	``It (the lavatory cover) is more complex than a toilet seat,`` Duretta said.


http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1985-11-28/news/8503220300_1_lockheed-spokesman-rich-stadler-submarine-hunting-aircraft-covers
	$544 Is Bottom Price For Toilet-seat Covers

	WASHINGTON — Lockheed Corp. says it will continue charging $544 for aircraft toilet seat covers it supplies to the U.S. Navy because that is the ``lowest possible price,`` it was reported Wednesday.


https://books.google.com/books?id=FLjNNTneVsoC&pg=PA138
	The Lockheed cases followed a similar pattern. In August 1984, Dina Rasor was contacted by Bob Greenstreet, an Air Force captain who worked at Travis Air Force Base in California. ...He contacted Rasor because of his concerns over the costs of spare parts that were used to maintain and repair the aircraft. The examples Greenstreet showed Rasor included a mechanical aircraft clock for $591 and a cowling door for the sides of the C-5A's engines that came in at $166,000 per unit.

	...a ten-cup coffeemaker for the C-5A that cost $7,662. This cost, incurred in 1984, was a substantial jump from the 1980 cost, which was "only" $4,947. To add insult to injury, Jonsson noted that the coffeemakers were poorly made and needed frequent repairs.

	Jonsson's second example was an aluminum and foam armrest pad for the seats in the C-5A. He estimated that the Air Force could make the pads itself for somehwere in the area of $5 to $25 per copy, but Lockheed was charging $670.06 for each one. Despite Caspar Weinberger's institution of a "Zero Overpricing Program" in response to the initial information on spare parts overcharges, Jonsson's efforts to get Weinberger's reform implemented were thwarted at every turn by the Air Force bureaucracy


------

https://qz.com/641738/this-rocket-executive-pissed-off-everyone-in-space-and-lost-his-job-the-next-day/	
	Students at the University of Colorado got an unexpected lesson about the speed of business transformation recently, when a recording of their guest’s candid remarks was posted to the internet, and led to his resignation the next day.

	Brett Tobey, an aerospace industry veteran who worked at Lockheed Martin for 32 years before joining the space launch company United Launch Alliance in 2015, was visiting his alma mater to talk to engineering students (pdf). He spoke about his efforts to help the company, a joint venture of Lockheed and Boeing, cut costs in response to the challenge from SpaceX.

	But his candid description of ULA’s business, while no doubt educational, also proved likely to upset the company’s important relationship with everyone from contractors to competitors to their number one client, the US government. After an attendee at the seminar posted a recording of the audio on line, Tobey stepped down.

	...“Along came Elon Musk and changed the game completely…we can’t afford [to bid] any more because the price points are coming down as low as $60 million,” he said. “The best day you’ll see us bid at $125 million or twice that number. Add in the capabilities cost, it eclipses the $200 million. … So now we’re going to have to take and figure out how to bid these things much lower cost. The government can’t just say, you know, ULA’s got a great track record, they’ve done 100 launches.”


not sure what's going on here but more Lockheed employees doing weird things

------

https://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/03/
sabotage-speculation-gathers-around-spacex-explosion.html
	Sabotage speculation gathers around SpaceX explosion

	Rumors of potential sabotage are gathering around the investigation of the explosion during a recent SpaceX launch test.

	SpaceX has been investigating the early September failure of a Falcon 9 rocket that caught fire and exploded on a Cape Canaveral launch pad just days before it was scheduled to launch.

	The Washington Post reported on Friday that the inquiry has taken a "bizarre twist," suggesting SpaceX is considering sabotage a possible cause of the explosion. According to the Post, a SpaceX employee sought access to facilities belonging to SpaceX competitor United Launch Alliance — a partnership between Boeing and Lockheed Martin.

	SpaceX investigators came across something suspicious when reviewing video of the failure—"an odd shadow and then a white spot" on the roof of a ULA building, according to the Post.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/implication-of-sabotage-adds-intrigue-to-spacex-investigation/2016/09/30/5bb60514-874c-11e6-a3ef-f35afb41797f_story.html
	Implication of sabotage adds intrigue to SpaceX investigation 

	By Christian Davenport September 30, 2016

	The long-running feud between Elon Musk’s space company and its fierce competitor United Launch Alliance took a bizarre twist this month when a SpaceX employee visited its facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., and asked for access to the roof of one of ULA’s buildings.

	About two weeks earlier, one of SpaceX’s rockets blew up on a launchpad while it was awaiting an engine test. As part of the investigation, SpaceX officials had come across something suspicious they wanted to check out, according to three industry officials with knowledge of the episode. SpaceX had still images from video that appeared to show an odd shadow, then a white spot on the roof of a nearby building leased by ULA, a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Boeing.


http://www.seattlepi.com/local/science/article/Elon-Musk-Sabotage-of-the-rocket-is-unlikely-9755987.php
	Rumors of sabotage started flying around after the Washington Post found out that a SpaceX employee tried to gain access to a nearby building operated by none other than SpaceX's main competitor and rival United Launch Alliance, which is run by Lockheed Martin and The Boeing Company. Why did the SpaceX's sleuth try to get into the building?

	The Post writes:

	"As part of the investigation, SpaceX officials had come across something suspicious they wanted to check out, according to three industry officials with knowledge of the episode. SpaceX had still images from video that appeared to show an odd shadow, then a white spot on the roof of (the building)."

	Mission control you may now fire your conspiracy rocket engines.


https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/783567161402888192
	Elon Musk
	Sabotage of the rocket is unlikely, but this article has some great theories :)

	Ranking Potential Saboteurs of Elon Musk’s SpaceX Venture
	Did a sniper take out SpaceX’s rocket last month?


https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/4x3ebq/conspiracy-theorists-think-lockheed-martin-blew-up-spacexs-rocket-with-a-laser
	Conspiracy Theorists Think Lockheed Martin Blew Up SpaceX's Rocket With a Laser

	Everyone is looking for an explanation as to why SpaceX's rocket broke up in the atmosphere Sunday. Elon Musk and SpaceX say that there was an "overpressure event" in the liquid oxygen tank. The internet's conspiracy theorists, however, have another explanation: The rocket was lasered out of the sky by SpaceX's fiercest rival, they say.

	Let's be clear: There's no real evidence that United Launch Alliance (a Lockheed Martin-Boeing collaboration) or anyone else attacked SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket. But that hasn't stopped the internet's sleuths from delving one level deeper into what exactly happened to the rocket.

	"This rocket didn't explode, it was lasered by Lockheed Martin," commenter Gangstaz wrote on my post about SpaceX Monday. "You can even see the laser's flickering as it continuously blasts the rocket at 2:15-2:23 right before the explosion. It's the intense flicker dot that goes from one side and then appears on the other side on the upper top half. Free markets are great, as long as you don't have any competition."


why did WaPo help start a bunch of fake news and internet conspriacies on Lockheed/Boeing sabotaging SpaceX?



------


https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/intelligence-history/corona-between-the-sun-and-the-earth/the-corona-story.html
	The Corona Story

	The Man of La Mancha, and the life of its protagonist, Miguel de Cervantes, are metaphors for the Corona program. De Cervantes' life ``... was a catalogue of catastrophe... What sort of man was this...who could suffer unceasing failure and yet...produce the staggering testament..."? (Wasserman, 1976). What sort of program was Corona? What kind of people were behind it? Who could suffer the unceasing failures of 13 shattered mission attempts before they finally could produce a testament to their quest--before they could launch an artificial satellite that would fly in a 100 nautical mile polar orbit above the Earth and from there take pictures that ultimately could show objects that were as small as 2 meters?

	...Corona was built from 1959 to 1972 by the Space Systems Division of Lockheed Martin Missiles & Space (formerly Lockheed MSC Space Systems Division). Lockheed was awarded the prime contract in 1956 for Weapons System 117L, an umbrella classified program. The Corona project evolved from WS-117L, and Lockheed became the prime contractor and served as technical adviser and integrator for all Corona equipment other than the Thor booster. Lockheed developed the Agena upper stage and integrated and led the test, launching, and on-orbit control operations of Corona (Star, 1995).


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corona_(satellite)
	The Corona program was a series of American strategic reconnaissance satellites produced and operated by the Central Intelligence Agency Directorate of Science & Technology with substantial assistance from the U.S. Air Force. The Corona satellites were used for photographic surveillance of the Soviet Union (USSR), the People's Republic of China, and other areas beginning in June 1959 and ending in May 1972. The name of this program is sometimes seen as "CORONA", but its actual name "Corona" was a codeword, not an acronym.

	...Coronas were launched by a Thor-Agena rocket, which used a Thor first stage and an Agena booster (which served as the second stage of the rocket lifting the Corona into orbit).

	The first attempted launch in the program took place on January 21, 1959 at Vandenberg AFB's LC-75. As the Agena was being loaded with fuel (the Thor was still empty at this point), someone decided to conduct a test of the launch computer sequencer. The result was that the Agena accidentally received a signal that staging had taken place and to begin booster separation. As everyone in the blockhouse watched in dismay, the ullage rockets on the outside of the Agena began firing and the internal fuel pumps began spinning up for engine start. A quick-thinking member of the blockhouse crew then pressed a button on his control console to send a shutdown signal to the booster. Although potential disaster had been averted, the Agena now had nothing except gravity holding it onto the Thor and the risk of the stage falling to the ground, rupturing, and spilling its corrosive nitric acid/UDMH propellant load existed. In addition, the heat from the ullage rockets could potentially ignite the propellants in the stage. Pad crews had to wait several hours for the batteries in the Agena to run down before they could begin dismantling the launch vehicle. The Thor sustained minor damage and was sent back to Douglas for refurbishment, but the Agena had had nitric acid spilled down its exterior and was deemed unsafe to fly. In any case, it was one of the first Agena stages produced and lacked some technical refinements made to newer models. It ended up being used at Lockheed for training purposes.

	The incident presaged the endless frustration that followed in the Corona program with one failed launch after another.[38] After the launch vehicle was repaired, Discoverer 1 lifted on February 28, 1959. The Thor performed properly and staging followed by Agena ignition took place on schedule. However, the Agena soon passed out of radar range and ground controllers lost contact with it (at this early stage of the program, there was no reliable way to track a launch vehicle deep in the Southern Hemisphere). While Discoverer 1 was initially assumed to have reached orbit, no signals were detected. It is generally believed that the Agena or satellite or both suffered an unknown malfunction after passing out of tracking range and that Discoverer 1 most likely impacted in the South Pacific or Antarctica.

	...Discoverer 2 (April 14, 1959) carried a recovery capsule for the first time and was also the first satellite to be placed into polar orbit. The main bus performed well, but the capsule recovery failed. It apparently came down near Svalbard, Norway, but was never found. Rumors persist that the Soviets recovered the capsule themselves, but there is no evidence of this and in any case, there would have been little information they could have gained from the small test payload. At this early phase, program planners were not even sure if the Thor/Agena had enough lift capacity to orbit a camera package. It is more likely that Discoverer 2's capsule sank into the ocean.

	Discoverer 3 was scheduled for launch on June 1. This satellite carried a biological payload with four black mice, the only one flown in the Corona program. The initial attempt miscarried when the mice poisoned themselves gnawing on Krylon paint inside the capsule, but a replacement batch were launched two days later. They never made it to orbit however; the Agena suffered a guidance malfunction and sent the mice and spacecraft into the Pacific Ocean.

	Discoverer 4 (June 25) failed to orbit when the Agena engine underperformed and the capsule could not attain orbital velocity.

	Discoverer 5 (August 13) accidentally sent its capsule into a higher orbit where it remained until November 1961.

	Discoverer 6 (August 19) suffered a retrorocket failure that prevented deorbit of the capsule.

	Discoverer 7 (November 7) experienced an attitude control malfunction in orbit, once again preventing capsule recovery.

	Discoverer 8 (November 20) was put into an incorrect orbit by the launch vehicle, again preventing capsule recovery.

	Discoverer 9 (February 4, 1960) ended up in the Pacific Ocean when the Thor cut off too early.

	Discoverer 10 (February 19) failed when the Thor suffered a control malfunction and was destroyed by Range Safety just under a minute into launch.

	Discoverer 11 (April 15) suffered another attitude control malfunction in orbit.

	Discoverer 12 (June 29) failed to orbit due to an attitude control problem with the Agena.

	Discoverer 13 (August 10) managed a full successful capsule recovery for the first time. This was also the first recovery of a man-made object from space; beating the Soviet Korabl Sputnik 2 by nine days. Discoverer XIII is now on display in the "Milestones of Flight" hall in the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington DC

	Discoverer 14 (August 18) carried a camera package for the first time. The cameras operated properly and the capsule was recovered from the Pacific Ocean 1-1/2 days after launch.

	Discoverer 15 (September 13) managed to successfully deorbit its capsule, but it sank into the Pacific Ocean and was not recovered.

	...On February 28, 1963, the first Thrust Augmented Thor lifted from VABF's LC-75 carrying the first KH-4 satellite. The launch of the new and unproven booster went awry as one SRB failed to ignite. Eventually the dead weight of the strap-on motor dragged the Thor off its flight path, leading to a Range Safety destruct. It was suspected that a technician had not attached an umbilical on the SRB properly. Although some failures continued to occur during the next few years...

------


https://www.amazon.com/Prophets-War-Lockheed-Military-Industrial-Complex/dp/1568586973
	...William D. Hartung's enthralling exposé chronicles the growth of Lockheed Martin into one of the most influential corporations in the world, and examines the pivotal role the company has had in America's metastasizing military industrial complex. It asks: How has one company become the recipient of such a large portion of America's tax dollars through contracts with the Pentagon, NASA, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Energy, the NSA, and even the U.S. Census and the IRS?


------


weird stuff going on with Lockheed



------


https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The+Sword+and+the+Shield+-+The+Mitrokhin+Archive+and+the+Secret+History+of+the+KGB_djvu.txt
	...The facts, however, are far more sensational even than the story dismissed as impossible by the SVR. The KGB defector had brought with him to Britain details not of a few hundred but of thousands of Soviet agents and intelligence officers in all parts of the globe, some of them “illegals” living under deep cover abroad, disguised as foreign citizens. 

	...Mitrokhin’s notes identify thirty-two of the S&T agents and trusted contacts active in the United States during the 1970s, mostly recruited in the same decade. A further eight whose espionage is not dated in the notes were also probably active in the 1970s.^^ The companies for which they worked included some of the leading American defense contractors: among them IBM, McDonnell Douglas and TRW.^^

	...For most of the Cold War, American business proved much easier to penetrate than the federal government. Long before the KGB finally acquired a major spy in the CIA with the walk in of Aldrich Ames in 1985, it was running a series of other mercenary agents in American defense contractors. Soviet agent penetration was accompanied by interception of the fax communications of some of the United States’ largest companies.^^ During the early 1980s probably 70 percent of all current Warsaw Pact weapons systems were based on Western technology. To an astonishing degree, both sides in the Cold War depended on American know-how.

	...By 1974 Line X at the London residency had nine operations officers (seven fewer than before operation FOOT), headed by the deputy resident, Oleg Aleksandrovich Yakimov, and had successfully resumed contact with most of the Line X agents put on ice in September 1971.^^ The most productive of the reactivated agents was, almost certainly, the aeronautical engineer ACE, recruited in the late 1960s.^^ By the time he died in the early 1980s, ACE’s product file consisted of about 300 volumes, each of about 300 pages. Most of these 90,000 pages consisted of technical documentation on new aircraft (among them Concorde, the Super VC- 10 and Lockheed L-1011), aero-engines (including Rolls- Royce, Olympus-593, RB-211 and SNEY-505) and flight simulators. ACE’s material on the flight simulators for the Lockheed L-1011 and Boeing 747 were the foundation for a new generation of Soviet equivalents. ACE also recruited under false flag (probably that of a rival company) an aero-engine specialist codenamed SWEDE. Remarkably, ACE was paid a monthly salary of only 225 pounds, raised to 350 pounds in 1980.


How many in Lockheed today?

have a theory about how they operate:

if they get an illegal well placed well in an organization, especially so they can  influence organizational culture or make policy or hiring decisions, it doesn't make sense to risk a reliable spy by actually stealing secrets. Instead they can find (or hire?) suckers, messed-up people they can exploit, use to do it for them. Hansenn maybe one:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Hanssen#Personal_life
	Robert Philip Hanssen (born April 18, 1944) is a former Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent who spied for Soviet and Russian intelligence services against the United States for 22 years from 1979 to 2001. He is currently serving 15 consecutive life sentences at ADX Florence, a federal supermax prison near Florence, Colorado.

	...Hanssen frequently visited D.C. strip clubs, and spent a great deal of time with a Washington stripper named Priscilla Sue Galey. She went with Hanssen on a trip to Hong Kong, and on a visit to the FBI training facility in Quantico, Virginia.[64] He gave her money, jewels, and a used Mercedes-Benz, but cut off contact with her before his arrest, when she fell into drug abuse and prostitution. Galey claims that although she offered to sleep with him, Hanssen declined, saying that he was trying to convert her to Catholicism.


Maybe John Walker was another:

https://pastebin.com/5M6F9Qqs

http://www.nytimes.com/1987/10/11/books/take-the-money-and-spy.html
    I PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE . . . The True Story of the Walkers: An American Spy Family. By Howard Blum
 
    THERE is a scene in a recent British film that sticks in the mind: John Gielgud, as an upper-class civil servant, seated in his tastefully decorated Georgian town house explaining to an outraged Michael Caine that his betrayal of the realm was "not a moral decision but an esthetic one." In his exquisitely modulated Oxbridge accent, Sir John speaks for all those well-born wallahs - Philby, Burgess, Maclean, Blunt and the rest - who passed military secrets to the Russians out of a muddle of forbidden homosexuality, pinched snobbery and overweening arrogance.
 
    For a time in the mid-1950's, the pseudopopulist from Wisconsin, Joseph McCarthy, managed to persuade many of his countrymen that American treason had been perpetrated by a similar class of desiccated aristocrats, typified by Alger Hiss and his patron, Dean Acheson.
 
    Whatever evidence can be produced for that scenario, it is surely not true today. As spy case after spy case bubbles to the surface in the 1980's, it is clear that spies are the product less of a haughty elite than of an American lumpen proletariat - rootless, bored, resentful and mercenary.

    In ''I Pledge Allegiance . . .'' Howard Blum portrays the most celebrated of this banal new generation of traitors: the maritime clan led by a retired Navy chief warrant officer, John A. Walker Jr., and encompassing his brother Arthur, his son, Michael, and his best friend, Jerry A. Whitworth - all of whom have either pleaded guilty to or been convicted of passing Navy secrets to the Russians. If the Walkers were really, as they have been called, the most damaging spy ring in American history, then surely they were also one of the most witless, squalid, tedious lots of agents ever to turn coat. 

    ...As to what drove this amiable oaf into a second career in espionage, Mr. Blum argues that it was less money than the electric thrill it sent through his otherwise mundane life. For others in the family, cash apparently played a larger role, but for the ringleader, the author makes clear, it was all an exciting game and ''Johnny was having a blast.'' 


(by some indications, Whitworth was running him instead of the other way around)


And Reality Winner another:


https://heavy.com/news/2017/06/reality-leigh-winner-leak-classified-information-nsa-top-secret-fbi/
	Reality Leigh Winner, of Augusta, was arrested by the FBI on June 3 and appeared in federal court on June 8, where she was indicted by a grand jury on the charge of willful retention and transmission of national defense information. 

	...At her first hearing, Winner’s attorney Titus Thomas Nichols made a motion for transcripts of the Grand Jury testimony to be disclosed. Media accounts say that testimony involves Winner “praising the Taliban” and saying she wanted to “burn the White House down.”

	...Notably, Winner didn’t shy away from giving her take on politics. Just one day before the 2016 presidential election, she made a post to Facebook saying: “On a positive note, This Tuesday when we become the United States of the Russian Federation, Olympic lifting will be the national sport.”

	“I never thought this would be something she would do,” her mother, Billie Winner-Davis told the Guardian. “I mean, she has expressed to me that she is not a fan of Trump – but she’s not someone who would go and riot or picket.”


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/06/us/politics/reality-leigh-winner-leak-nsa.html
	Reality Winner, N.S.A. Contractor Accused of Leak, Was Undone by Trail of Clues

	By CHARLIE SAVAGE, SCOTT SHANE and ALAN BLINDER

	...Days later, she would mail the file to a reporter at the national-security news outlet The Intercept. By the time the site published the d9ocument on Monday, Ms. Winner was already under arrest — undone by a trail of clues that quickly led investigators to her. Ms. Winner, who the F.B.I. said confessed when confronted, is now the defendant in the first criminal leak case of the Trump era.

	Her case was a reminder of the vast universe of people who have access to government secrets, largely because of the expansion of security agencies in the years since the Sept. 11 attacks. About four million people, both government employees and contractors, hold security clearances, including 1.3 million with top secret clearances like Ms. Winner’s.


Even if all they want to do is steal secrets, there are a lot of things well-placed agents in an organization can do to make that easier that are legal or hard to catch: spot for "suckers" to use to carry out classified material, change organization's policy/culture to make it easier to steal secrets in the first place:

https://archive.org/stream/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB/The%20Sword%20and%20the%20Shield%20-%20The%20Mitrokhin%20Archive%20and%20the%20Secret%20History%20of%20the%20KGB_djvu.txt
	The KGB also took an active part in the selection of  Soviet students for academic exchange programs with the  United States and trained many of them as talent-spotters.  Students were told to seek places at universities and  research institutes within easy reach of the residencies at  New York (Brooklyn Polytechnic, MIT, Rensselaer  Polytechnic and the universities of Columbia, Cornell,  Harvard, New York and Princeton), Washington  (American, Catholic, Georgetown, George Washington  and Maryland Universities) and San Francisco (the  University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco,  California Institute of Technology, University of Southern  California and Stanford).

	Directorate T’s success in penetrating American targets  was greatly assisted by poor security in some of its target  companies and research institutes. Appearing in 1985  before a Senate committee investigating security among  defense contractors, Christopher Boyce testified that he  and colleagues at TRW “regularly partied and boozed it  up during working hours with the ‘black vault’” housing  the Rhyolite satellite project. Bacardi rum, he claimed,  was kept behind the cipher machines and a cipher-  destruction device used as a blender to mix banana  daiquiris and Mai-Tais.^^^ Security failures in most other  companies probably took less exotic and alcoholic forms. 


In the digital age, the most efficient way to do industrial espionage might be completely different. You're going to lose a lot of guys to law enforcement if you have them fill up flash drives and walk into the Russian embassy. But you can steal secrets without getting into legal trouble: have an agent "accidentally" walk into a SCIF with her cellphone in her pocket, have an IT person "forget" to patch an exploit in cyber-security software, and let hackers on the other side of the ocean take care of the rest. And with enough influence, you can change training, IT, security policies to make this easier--e.g., decide you're going to "cut costs" by putting everyone's OPM data on the internet with last years anti-virus.

If you get people in charge of hiring decisions, you can keep hiring more spies. Once things get to that point, they can keep spies inside an organization indefinitely.

And just "stealing secrets" is thinking small--the point is no matter what they want to do, they get more bang for their buck not by just spying on an organization, but influencing it, controlling it. For example, the organization itself could be used as a prop for propaganda, and that could be worth more than any military secrets they could steal.

If they want to do real damage to an organization, that's easy to get away with too. They don't have to plant bombs in tanks and planes to sabotage them, they just have to do a bad job at building them. Be lazy and incompetent on purpose. Apparently this was their thinking around World War I:


http://spartacus-educational.com/USAhaywood.htm
	Haywood and the Industrial Workers of the World opposed the United States becoming involved in the First World War. He issued a statement on behalf of the IWW: "With the European war for conquest and exploitation raging and destroying the lives, class consciousness and unity of the workers, clouding the main issues, we openly declare ourselves the determined opponents of all nationalistic sectionalism, or patriotism, and the militarism preached and supported by our one enemy, the capitalist class.

	...In a series of raids resulted in the indictment of Haywood and most of the union's leadership under the Espionage Act. After a long trial in Chicago, Haywood was sentenced to a fine of $20,000 and twenty years' imprisonment.

	In March 1921, Haywood jumped bail and fled to the Soviet Union, while most of his co-defendants languished in prison.


https://books.google.com/books?id=v0A7AAAAYAAJ&pg=PA48&lpg=PA48&
    I.W.W. Deportation Cases
    By United States. Congress. House. Committee on Immigration and Naturalization
 
    ...an alien, who at the time of his arrest at Seattle, was the secretary and active head of the Union of Russian Workers in that section of the country. ...He returned to Seattle and immediately resumed his connections with that same organization, also joining the I.W.W. organization.
 
    ...Alien stated further that there are about 20 members of the union; there were 60 or 70 before the Russian revolution, and many of the members have gone to Russia. He admitted his active participation in the affairs of the Russian Workers' Union.
 
    Alien claims he was a refugee when he entered this country, having been compelled to flee from Russia under an assumed name because he had been engaged in distributing revolutionary literature.
 
    ...Kazis Maskalunas. Arrested at Seattle January 31, 1918, on the ground advocating or teaching anarchy, and ordered deported to Russia at Government expense;
 
    ...Aaron Slutzker. Arrested at Seattle November 28, 1917, on the ground, advocating or teaching anarchy. By decision of September 28, 1919, was ordered deported to Russia at Government expense when possible
 
    ...Charles Bernat, aged 39, single, native and subject of Russia, entered without inspection, presumably at Tacoma, Wash., in 1902 ...The evidence is clear in this case that the above-named alien has be his acts aided and supported the doctrine of sabotage as taught by the I.W.W. It is therefore recommended that he be deported to Russia, at Government expense, when possible, on the ground that he has been found advocating and teaching the unlawful destruction of property.
 
    ...The doctrine and practices of the order, as disclosed by the attached literature, may be indicated by short excerpts from The I.W.W.: Its History, Structure, and Methods, by Vincent St. John and others.
 
    "As a revolutionary organization, the Industrial Workers of the World aims to use any and all tactics that will get the results sought, with the least expenditure of time and energy. The tactics used are determined solely by the power of the organization to make good in their use. The question of 'right' and 'wrong' does not concern us.
 
    "It aims, where strikes are used, to paralyze all branches of the industry involved, when the employers can least afford a cessation of work--during the busy season and when there are rush orders to be filled.
 
    "Failing to force concessions from the employers by the strike, work is resumed and sabotage is used to force the employers to concede to the demands of the workers."
 
    Sabotage is defined by several I.W.W. writers.
 
    The new Unionism, by Andre Tridon: "We may distinguish three forms of sabotage. (1) Active sabotage which consists in the damaging of goods or machinery. (2) Obstructionism or passive sabotage which consists in carrying out orders literally, regardless of consequences."
 
    The Voix du Peuple: "The first thing to do before going out on strike is to cripple all the machinery. * * * Are bakery workers planning to go on strike? Let them pour in the ovens a few pints of petroleum or any other greasy or pungent matter. After that soldiers or scabs may come and bake bread. The smell will not come out of the tiles for three months. Is a strike in sight in steel mills? Pour sand or emery into the oil cups."
 
    ...Sabotage: It's History, Philosophy, and Function, by Walker C. Smith: "Sabotage is a direct application of the idea that property has no rights that its creators are bound to respect. * * * The question is not, Is Sabotage Immoral? but, Does Sabotage get the goods? * * * A bar of soap in the boiler would keep the soldiers at home or else force them to march to the strike. ...Sabotage is discredited by those who believe in property rights. It is the weapon of those who no longer reverence the thing that fetters them. Its advocacy and use helps to destroy the 'property illusion.' The parasites who have property, oppose sabotage, while the producers who have poverty, are commencing to yield that potent weapon."
 
    ...All of the books from which excerpts have been made are either published, sold, or distributed by the I.W.W. Publishing Co. Attention is invited to that part of the testimony of Mr. Dougherty, the alien's witness, in which he states that sabotage might be termed "the conscious withdrawal of efficiency, the slowing up in production, and a refusal to produce in quantity," or that "it might take the form of putting out a poor quality of work." The bureau contends that this is sabotage in its most insidious form, and that for a man to consciously withdraw his efficiency and turn out work of an inferior or defective quality might not only be the direct cause of destruction of property but also destruction of human lives.