http://www.pulitzer.org/article/sputnik-should-wake-us-our-failings


Lippman acting like Russia launching sputnik is end of the world, time for deep soul searching

I guess if they get Americans worked up to be upset/jealous about Sputnik, it becomes easier to blame them for sabotaging space launches.

Sputnik and the media frenzy about it kicked off the whole space-race mentality, which would be exploited to blame either side for sabotage.


...


would technological development for space have been as fast without the "space race"?

hard to say

there would be other reasons to motivate people to go to space, (heady dreams of humanity's future, communications satellites/tech benefits, wanting to see what's up there) but it sort-of got replaced by "beat the Soviets/Americans."



https://archive.org/stream/B-001-002-046/B-001-002-046_djvu.txt
	The Space Race 

	In October, 1957, Russia electrified the world with her 
	first Sputnik. Built on plans stolen from the United States 
	after World War II, Sputnik I, with a payload weighing 184 
	pounds, was successfully launched into orbit October 4th. 

	Immediately the United States went into “panic produc- 
	tion” to catch up. However, U.S. missile experts insisted on a broad range of experimental effort rather than single-focus 
	crash programs such as the Russians seemed to be following. 
	Long range, the American approach soon began to pay off. 
	Russia continued to put up bigger payloads but America 
	started getting far better scientific data. Gradually the U.S. 
	satellite and missile teams began forging ahead. 


this says U.S. successful because they treated it more like a marathon than a race



http://www.history.com/topics/space-race
	A New Urgency

	In 1958, the U.S. launched its own satellite, Explorer I, designed by the U.S. Army under the direction of rocket scientist Wernher von Braun. That same year, President Dwight Eisenhower signed a public order creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), a federal agency dedicated to space exploration.


space race had its perks


	Space Race Heats Up

	In 1959, the Soviet space program took another step forward with the launch of Luna 2, the first space probe to hit the moon. In April 1961, the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to orbit Earth, traveling in the capsule-like spacecraft Vostok 1. For the U.S. effort to send a man into space, dubbed Project Mercury, NASA engineers designed a smaller, cone-shaped capsule far lighter than Vostok; they tested the craft with chimpanzees, and held a final test flight in March 1961 before the Soviets were able to pull ahead with Gagarin’s launch. On May 5, astronaut Alan Shepard became the first American in space (though not in orbit).

	Later that May, President John F. Kennedy made the bold, public claim that the U.S. would land a man on the moon before the end of the decade. In February 1962, John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth, and by the end of that year, the foundations of NASA’s lunar landing program–dubbed Project Apollo–were in place.


Soviets were ahead for most of it


	Achievements of Apollo

	From 1961 to 1964, NASA’s budget was increased almost 500 percent, and the lunar landing program eventually involved some 34,000 NASA employees and 375,000 employees of industrial and university contractors. Apollo suffered a setback in January 1967, when three astronauts were killed after their spacecraft caught fire during a launch simulation. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union’s lunar landing program proceeded tentatively, partly due to internal debate over its necessity and to the untimely death (in January 1966) of Sergey Korolyov, chief engineer of the Soviet space program.

	December 1968 saw the launch of Apollo 8, the first manned space mission to orbit the moon, from NASA’s massive launch facility on Merritt Island, near Cape Canaveral, Florida. On July 16, 1969, U.S. astronauts Neil Armstrong, Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin and Michael Collins set off on the Apollo 11 space mission, the first lunar landing attempt. After landing successfully on July 20, Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon’s surface; he famously called the moment “one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.”


Kennedy increased NASA budget 500%, decides time to go to moon


	Conclusion of the Space Race

	By landing on the moon, the United States effectively “won” the space race that had begun with Sputnik’s launch in 1957. For their part, the Soviets made four failed attempts to launch a lunar landing craft between 1969 and 1972, including a spectacular launch-pad explosion in July 1969. From beginning to end, the American public’s attention was captivated by the space race, and the various developments by the Soviet and U.S. space programs were heavily covered in the national media. This frenzy of interest was further encouraged by the new medium of television. Astronauts came to be seen as the ultimate American heroes, and earth-bound men and women seemed to enjoy living vicariously through them. Soviets, in turn, were pictured as the ultimate villains, with their massive, relentless efforts to surpass America and prove the power of the communist system.


this is problem with space race--it can end with a "winner"

wasn't really a good ending, should have ended in cooperation

I think what they do is allege the U.S. cheated:

- the U.S. was butthurt at beginning (courtesy of Lippman, others)

- Soviets were winning

- Suddenlly Soviet rockets are exploding

- NASA comes out of nowhere and lands on the moon while Soviet plan for that, even while technologically ahead for most of it, have their own mission explode

- Lots of allegations of Moon landing being faked, with effort put into conspiracy theories, easier for someone who hates U.S. to believe

- U.S. swinging their dicks everywhere after landing on Moon, declare themselves best


so, from this angle, the space race might have been a long-running active measures campaign to brainwash a large group of people into being willing to sabotage space missions (or at least used that way).

Achenbachs disposition speaks to this--comes off as having a grudge.

If they could put people like that in NASA, Lockheed Martin, would get capability to sabotage space missions.

Still leaves a question of how did they get people willing to sabotage Russian missions, phobos grunt?

I.F. Stone and Warmflahs "YOU ARE NOT READY" types would do that I guess

maybe they want to think long term

they can milk thousand year old grudges to get people in conflict (see: Israel v. Palestine conflict, also similar idea with Japan v. China conflict).

So they would want to write history, at least for their own agents, as this: the Soviets were winning the space race and the U.S. cheated, just blew up soviet rockets (and/or faked Moon landing). Then, forever after, they have a prop to motivate agents to sabotage the U.S. space program. At the same time, they can find reasons to defund the Russian space program.

The logical counter to this would be to shift dominance in the world space program to Russia, which was happening with Shuttle decomissioned and Soyuz rockets being the only way to get the ISS. IIRC phobos-grunt was also one of the only missions that could have found evidence of life on mars (curiosity apparently isn't built for that: http://gillevin.com/Mars/SPIE_2013_Revised.pdf)

But the rockets and phobos-grunt crashed anyway... why?


------


https://jalopnik.com/this-insane-rocket-is-why-the-soviet-union-never-made-i-1448356326
	Americans tend to talk a lot about the Space Race and how we made it to the Moon and we were first and no one else was second because we are the best. It's put into context by the fact that the Soviet satellite Sputnik was the first in space, but by the time we get around to discussing the moon landings no one mentions why. And this enormous, absolutely insane rocket is the reason.

	Sure, one could go in and argue that the failure of the Soviet Union to make it to the Moon was a result of an incompatible governing system, or economic hurdles, or a myriad of other factors contributed to the communist nation never placing a human on the lunar surface, but they all culminated in this, the N1 rocket.

	If you were an alien observing earth sometime around January 1962 you may be forgiven for placing a bet on the Soviet Union as the eventual winner of the Space Race. They had gotten the first satellite into space, the first animal into space, and not only the first human into space with cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, but they also had him orbit the Earth. Americans had managed to come in second every time, and the only manned spaceflight they accomplished was a simple suborbital flight. And in case you're not sure what that means, it means that they had astronaut Alan Shepard shoot straight up and straight down, and that was it. 



------


maybe it's more simple than that

all they'd need are people who enjoy making others miserable, ruining someone else's day

hints of that in some of the instances of possible sabotage--for mars polar lander, half the thing being done in different units made them look stupid. For Schiaparelli, the IMU was programmed exactly to make the thing think it was flipped upside down if you jostled it too much. For phobos grunt it failed exactly in the spot where they'd have to scramble around the world just to get a reading from it. Fake news said it was a "secret bioweapon" (maybe referring it to being full of hyrdazine fuel). After Popovkin said hydrazine from phobos grunt wasn't a health risk, he mysteriously died of "hydrazine poisoning."

there's a hint of a sense of humor in some of these. It might just be funny to them, and that's enough to get them to do it. 