https://www.justice.gov/file/1035477/download

pg 4



	...Defendant ORGANIZATION had a strategic goal to sow discord in the U.S. political system, including the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Defendants posted derogatory information about a number of candidates, and by early to mid-2016, Defendants’ operations included supporting the presidential campaign of then-candidate Donald J. Trump (“Trump Campaign”) and disparaging Hillary Clinton. Defendants made various expenditures to carry out those activities, including buying political advertisements on social media in the names of U.S. persons and entities. Defendants also staged political rallies inside the United States, and while posing as U.S. grassroots entities and U.S. persons, and without revealing their Russian identities and ORGANIZATION affiliation, solicited and compensated real U.S. persons to promote or disparage candidates. Some Defendants, posing as U.S. persons and without revealing their Russian association, communicated with unwitting individuals associated with the Trump Campaign and with other political activists to seek to coordinate political activities. 


goal to "sow discrod"

included supporting Trump campaign "by early to mid-2016"

staged rallies in U.S.

solicited Americans and communicated with "individuals associated with the Trump Campaign" and "other political activists"


	...The ORGANIZATION sought, in part, to conduct what it called “information warfare against the United States of America” through fictitious U.S. personas on social media platforms and other Internet -based media. 


called what they did "information warfare"


pg 12

started gathering/analyzing data on U.S. political social media sites "at least in or around 2014"

sent some people over to the U.S.--why?


pg 13


	...In order to collect additional intelligence, Defendants and their co-conspirators posed as U.S. persons and contacted U.S. political and social activists. For example, starting in or around June 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators, posing online as U.S. person s,  communicated with a real U.S. person affiliated with a Texas -based grassroots organization. During the exchange, Defendants and their co-conspirators learned from the real U.S. person that they should focus their activities on “purple states like Colorado, Virginia & Florida.” After that exchange, Defendants and their co-conspirators commonly referred to targeting “purple states ” in directing their efforts. 


contacted "U.S. political and social activists." Indictment says they learned they should "target purple states" from some of their intelligence gathering in the U.S. Couldn't they have figured that out by then from studying U.S. political social media since 2014? or common sense?


pg 14

	...Defendants and their co-conspirators, through fraud and deceit, created hundreds of social media accounts and used them to develop certain fictitious U.S. personas into “leader[s] of public opinion” in the United States . 


want to become "leaders of public opinion"


	...Specialists were instructed  to  write about topics germane to the United States  such  as U.S. foreign  policy and U.S. economic issues. Specialists were  directed to create “political  intensity through  supporting radical groups, users dissatisfied with [the] social and economic situation and oppositional social movements.” 


supporting "radical" and "dissassitifed"


	...Defendants and their co-conspirators also created thematic group pages on social media sites, particularly on the social media platforms Facebook and Instagram. ORGANIZATION-controlled pages addressed a range of issues, including: immigration (with group names including “Secured Borders”); the Black Lives Matter movement (with group names including “Blacktivist”); religion (with group names including “United Muslims of America” and “Army of Jesus”); and certain geographic regions within the United States (with group names including “South United” and “Heart of Texas”). By 2016, the size of many ORGANIZATION-controlled groups had grown to hundreds of thousands of online followers. 


targeted divisive issues, names some social media projects of theirs


grew to "hundrds of thousands" of followers by 2016


pg 15 37-38 on tracking their performance, growth


pg 16

	...By approximately May 2014, Defen dants and their co-conspirators discussed efforts to interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential election . Defendants and their co-conspirators began to monitor U.S. social media accounts and other sources of information about the 2016 U.S. presidential election. 


discussing 2016 election by May 2014


pg 17


	...On or about February 10, 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators internally circulated an outline of themes for future content to be posted to ORGANIZATION-controlled social media accounts. Specialists were instructed to post content that focused on “politics in the USA” and to “use any opportunity to criticize Hillary and the rest (except Sanders and Trump—we support them).” 


not doing much to hide it


pg 18

46 -- encouraging black people and muslims not to vote


pg 21-22


started organizing rallies from Russian in June 2016


	...In order to build attendance for the rallies, Defendants and their co-conspirators promoted the events through public posts on their false U.S. persona social media accounts. In addition, Defendants and their co-conspirators contacted administrators of large social media groups focused on U.S. politics and requested that they advertise the rallies. 


might have had some help from administrators of other social media groups


	...In or around late June 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators used the Facebook group “United Muslims of America ” to promote a rally called “Support Hillary. Save American Muslims ” held on July 9, 2016 in the District of Columbia. Defendants and their co-conspirators recruited a real U.S. person to hold a sign depicting Clinton and a quote attributed to her stating “I think Sharia Law will be a powerful new direction of freedom .” Within three weeks, on or about July 26, 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators pos ted on the same Facebook page that Muslim voters were “between Hillary Clinton and a hard place. ” 


supporting Clinton but not so well


54 organized "March for Trump" and "Down with Hillary" rallies Jul 23, 2016


communicated with Trump Campaign staff about "Florida Goes Trump" rallies


	...After the election of Donald Trump in or around November 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators used false U.S. personas to organize and coordinate U.S. political rallies in support of then president-elect Trump, while simultaneously using other false U.S. personas to organize and coordinate U.S. political rallies protesting the results of the 2016 U.S. presidential election. For example, in or around November 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators organized a rally in New Yo r k through one ORGANIZATION-controlled group designed to “show your support for President-Elect Donald Trump” held on or about November 12, 2016. At the same time, Defendants and their co-conspirators, through another ORGANIZATION-controlled group, organized a rally in New Yo r k called “Trump is NOT my President” held on or about November 12, 2016. Similarly, Defendants and their co-conspirators organized a rally entitled “Charlotte Against Trump” in Charlotte, North Carolina, held on or about November 19, 2016.


staged simultaneous pro-Trump and anti-Trump rallies "protesting results of election" after election--speaks to motive?


pg 24

	...In order to avoid detection and impede investigation by U.S. authorities of  Defendants’ operations,  Defendants  and their co-conspirators deleted  and  destroyed data, including emails, social media accounts, and other evidence of their activities. 


how do they know this?


pg 25 -27 on various things they did to organize rallies like "March for Trump"


	...Beginning on or about August 11, 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators used the false U.S. persona “Matt Skiber” Facebook account to recruit a real U.S. person to acquire signs and a costume depicting Clinton in a prison uniform. 


supposedly one incident of recruiting an American

74. communications with "Chair for the Trump Campaign" in a Florida county, organizing a Trump rally


pg 29


	...On or about August 19, 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators used the false U.S. persona “Matt Skiber” account to write to the real U.S. person affiliated with a Texas-based grassroots organization who previously had advised the false persona to focus on “purple states like Colorado, Virginia & Florida.” Defendants and their co-conspirators told that U.S. person, “We were thinking about your recommendation to focus on purple states and this is what we’re organizing in FL.” Defendants and their co-conspirators then sent a link to the Facebook event page for the Florida rallies and asked that person to send the information to Tea Party members in Florida. The real U.S. person stated that he/she would share among his/her own social media contacts, who would pass on the information. 


the U.S. contact who told them "focus on purple states" continued contact and helped spread their influence operations


	...On or about August 24, 2016, Defendants and their co-conspirators updated an internal ORGANIZATION list of over 100 real U.S. persons contacted through ORGANIZATION- controlled false U.S. persona accounts and tracked to monitor recruitment efforts and requests. The list included contact information for the U.S. persons, a summary of their political views, and activities they had been asked to perform by Defendants and their co-conspirators. 


I guess had a lot of "recruits" like this

82 says wired money to one contact to organize Florida rally

83 organized rally in NY for sep 11--which one was that?


pg 33-34 were able to get some fake id info and use it--how?



------


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/russian-trolls-went-attack-during-key-election-moments-n827176
	The trolls manipulated major events, even horrifying ones, to spread their messages. The first big spike in activity was March 22, 2016, when three suicide bombers killed 32 in Brussels.

	Daily troll volume suddenly increased several-fold. They linked the terrorist act claimed by ISIS with a perceived threat posed by Muslim refugees to the U.S.

	JeanneMccarthy0: "#IslamKills this is seriously getting out hand! I'm so scared for the future of my children! #PrayForBrussels #StopIslam"

	RyanMaxwell_1: "#Brussels Let's close all mosques! #freespeech is overrated! #IslamKills"

	Ben Nimmo, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, a think tank, told NBC News in an email that the surge of tweets sought to "demonize Muslims, migrants, refugees and anyone who supports them, and to panic real Americans into increasingly extreme views."


exploiting terrorist attacks to promote fear of Muslims


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/russian-trolls-went-attack-during-key-election-moments-
	Playing all sides

	The trolls were organized into three general ideological networks, said Allen, the Neo4j analyst.

	Trolls on the "Right" cluster promoted Trump and attacked left-leaning causes and politicians, mainly Clinton.

	Trolls in the "Left" cluster generally attacked Trump and his followers, though they didn't express support for Hillary Clinton.

	"Black Lives Matter" were pro-black, but not pro-Democrat. Their message was to distrust all authority, especially the police.

	During the election, the hyped-up tweets appeared to be just part of the social media noise.


"playing all sides"


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/russian-trolls-went-attack-during-key-election-moments-n827176
	Experts say that the troll activity fits in with a Cold War-era playbook called "active measures," in which the Russians used disinformation and selective reframing to undermine faith in democracy, exploit political divisions, blur fact and fiction, and promote Russian policy agendas abroad.

	"They think that for decades they've been on the defensive, and we've been hurtling at them our messages about markets and democracy and liberalism," said Michael McFaul, who was the U.S. ambassador to Russia from 2012 to 2014 in the Obama administration.

	"And they're now on the offensive."


interesting McFaul would say that


------


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/russian-trolls-pushed-graphic-racist-tweets-american-voters-n823001
	For instance, the prolific Russian troll account @TEN_GOP tweeted, "Just 2 days after #NiceAttack stupid liberals welcome #rapefugees! How stupid! #RNCinCLE," on July 17, 2016.


promoting fear of migrants


	...Some of the accounts also weighed in heavily on racially charged topics, like the protests in Ferguson, Missouri, in the summer of 2014 after the death of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, at the hands of a white police officer whom a grand jury later declined to indict on any charges.

	"All of those protesters in Ferguson, your hand are covered with blood! #CopsWillBeCops #FergusonShooting," tweeted Russian troll @EvaGreen69 on March 15, 2015.

	Another tweet by a Russian troll account @staywoke88 that pretended to be a Black Lives Matter protester took the most infamous white nationalist slogan and tweaked it to make it appear to be a pro-black statement.

		"We must secure the existence of our people and a future for black children #BLACKLIVESMATTER"


	...In the end, the troll strategy was an export of methods Russia has used for years domestically to get citizens to see themselves not as part of a nation but as members of smaller ethnic and identity-based groups, and play all sides against each other.


exploiting racism


	..."They want us fighting among ourselves," said McFaul, the former ambassador. "Then we're distracted. We're not talking about Syria. We're not talking about American leadership. We're questioning whether democracy will survive. We're less of a player internationally — and that's good for Russia."


McFaul saying odd things again...


------


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/trump-other-politicians-celebs-shared-boosted-russian-troll-tweets-n817036
	The handles flagged in the database, along with less than half-a-dozen from previous reports, contains these political figures: President of the United States, Donald J. Trump (@realdonaldtrump), prominent white nationalist Richard Spencer (@RichardBSpencer), Trump associate and political consultant Roger J. Stone Jr. (@RogerJStoneJr), Former US UN Ambassador Samantha Power (@AmbPower44), the president's son Donald J. Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr), former KKK Grand Wizard David Duke (@DrDavidDuke), nationalist Dutch politician Geert Wilders (@gertwilderspvv), Sen. John Coryn, (R-TX) (@JohnCornyn), presidential advisor and spokeswoman Kellyanne Conway (@KellyannePolls), Women's March national co-chair Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour), son of fired Trump National Security Advisor Michael Flynn, Michael Flynn Jr. (@mflynnJR), Sen. Nina Turner (D-OH) (@ninaturner), Trump's digital media advisor Brad Parscale (@parscale), Senior Advisor of Executive Deputy Director, UN Women, Ravi Karkara (@ravikarkara), former Trump White House communications director Anthony Scaramucci (@Scaramucci), former White House press secretary Sean Spicer (@seanspicer), and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) (@tedcruz).

	The list also includes media personalities and commentators like FOX News host Sean Hannity (@seanhannity), conservative author Ann Coulter (@AnnCoulter), MSNBC host Chris Hayes (@chrislhayes), conservative author Eric Bolling (@ericbolling), NYU political scientist Ian Bremmer (@ianbremmer), conservative TV and radio host Laura Ingraham (@IngrahamAngle), CNN anchor Jake Tapper (@jaketapper), Slate Chief Political Correspondent Jamelle Bouie (@jbouie), Editor of CounterPunch, a left-leaning political investigative magazine Jeffrey St. Clair, (@JSCCounterPunch), Fox Business Network host Lou Dobbs (@LouDobbs), journalist Micah Lee (@micahflee), upstart online radio host of YourVoice America Bill Mitchell (@mitchellvii), popular right wing video blogger Paul Ramsey (@ramzpaul), conspiracy theorist and InfoWars host Alex Jones (@RealAlexJones), popular "alt-right" video blogger Stefan Molyneux (@StefanMolyneux), and @whpresscorps, whose Twitter bio says, "Daily adventures with the White House Press Corps in their own words"...

	And pop culture icons singer Nicki Minaj (@NICKIMINAJ), comedian Sarah Silverman (@SarahKSilverman), Daily Show host Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah), James Woods (@realjameswoods), and even the CEO of Twitter Jack Dorsey (@jack) have also been flagged.


a lot of influential people interacting with Russian trolls


	Reporters and editors for global news outlets also embedded the Russian propaganda tweets from Jan. 1, 2016, to Sept. 30, 2017, according to social media analysis by Meltwater, a San Francisco-based media intelligence company, which shared its findings with NBC News.


also ended up in news reports


------


https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/now-available-more-200-000-deleted-russian-troll-tweets-n844731

has some links to raw data of tweets known to be from Russian propagandists


------

https://qz.com/1209790/mueller-and-the-internet-research-agency-russian-trolls-discussed-shakira-bible-and-pizza-before-the-2016-election/

a lot of initial tweets trying to make them seem like normal accounts