https://digitalcommons.csumb.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1003&context=hornbeck_spa_2
  pg 296

  Superstitions of a ridiculous, and most extravagant nature, were found associated with these Indians, and even now, in almost every town, or hamlet, the child's first education is a belief in their authenticity; and they grow up from infancy familiar with all their fabulous traditions. The effect tends to enervate their physical faculties, and weaken their mental, so that they naturally become a pusillanimous race of people, liable to be deceived, imposed upon, and of course easily influenced by the puplem, and old men, who are their sole instructors.

  These are men, and also females, who are believed to possess the power of enchantment, to such a degree, that no one can withstand their powers; so that without resistance, all immediately acquiesce in their demands.


this is worth looking into more: did priest caste keep down early Americans as in Europe?


amusing that pg 298 missing given what it says at beginning of pg 299

related to this: https://www.quora.com/Did-monotheism-develop-in-the-Americas-before-the-rest-of-the-world-arrived?utm_medium=organic&utm_source=google_rich_qa&utm_campaign=google_rich_qa , apparently monotheism was in Americas before the rest of the world


pg 299


  ...They had amongst them certain individuals who pretended to be descendants of the "Coyote" eaters of human flesh--not as the cannibals and Mexicans--but their manner of proceeding was after the following disgusting custom. Whenever a Captain, or one of the Puplem, died, the sent for the Eno, who was thus called before he officiated in his duties, and afterwards, "Tacue," signifying "an eater." Having arrived at the place, where they had placed the dead body, he immediately cut off a large piece from the neck, and the back, near the shoulder, and consumed the flesh in its raw state, in presence of the multitude assembled to witness the performance. This was always done in commemoration of the feat performed by the "Coyote" upon the body of the great Captain Oniot, as has been already recounted in a previous chapter. For this, Eno was well remunerated, and every one contributed for the purpose. The young of both sexes, were very much afraid of this Tacue, and looked upon him as a sorcerer.


Boscana says the Acagchemem were afraid of some of their religious leaders who did canabilistic rituals in front of them


from introduction pg 235

  
  ...The motives which have induced me to write the present history, have been, principally, to fulfil my obligations as Apostolical Missionary ; to have before me the means of presenting to these poor Indians an account of the errors entertained by them during their state of heathenism, and to contrast the same with the light they now enjoy as Christians. Also, to leave to my successors such instruction, as will relieve them from the trouble and labor that I experienced, in procuring a knowledge of the belief, usages, and customs, i. e. the Religion, which these natives possessed in their heathen state ; persuaded as I am, that being ignorant of this, it will be difficult to remove their erroneous belief, and give them an understanding of the true Religion. It is difficult, I confess, if unacquainted with their language, to penetrate their secrets, as they do not all understand the signification of their usages and customs ; this knowledge being confined to the chiefs of their tribes, and the old men who officiate as priests ; and when they reveal any thing, to their children, it is only to such as they intend to rear for their successors, and these, are enjoined to keep fast the secrets, and not communicate them to any one, under pain of severe chastisement. A veil is cast over all their religious observances, and the mystery with which they are performed, seems to perpetuate respect for them, and preserve an ascendancy over the people. This is the reason that the ceremonies of the dances, in their grand feasts, (which are properly exercises of religion,) cannot be understood. They have never had the use of writings, letters, or characters of any description. All their knowledge is from tradition, which they preserve in songs for their dances, and these are introduced, by the chief, at their festivities, in a language distinct from that, in common use. Others unite with them, but without understanding the meaning of what they do, or articulate ; perhaps, the songs thus introduced, are in the primitive language. 


Acagchemem a lot of similarities to Catholic church in Europe--adherents don't understand all of religion, elite and priests passing down secret knowledge, no literacy among public, religious practices in different language from vernacular.


  ...Although the habitations of the said Chichimecas formed a kind of village, still they had no police, nor acknowledged any higher power than that of "Capitan" or chief, and toward him was observed but little respect; indeed, hardly sufficient to designate him from the rest. They did not live permanently in one place, but roamed about, from spot to spot, as the scarcity of game compelled them. Of medicine they had no knowledge; consequently, no means of curing the sick, and the bodies of their dead were immediately burnt. Idolatry prevailed among them, but not a belief in a plurality of gods; neither did they sacrifice, as was the custom among the Mexican Indians.

  Having thus described th Chichimecas, we see precisely the character of the Californians, with the exception, that the last mentioned lived in villages, and where governed by a chief