


trying to get all the news articles on the underwater city:





May 14 2001:

https://web.archive.org/web/20010517055536/www.msnbc.com/news/573489.asp?cp1=1
	Looking for lost riches in Cuba’s seas

	Underwater surveyors say they may have found sunken city

	Reuters

	“It’s a new frontier,” Soviet-born Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zelitsky enthused as she pored over video images of hitherto-unseen seafloor taken by underwater robots.

    “We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters,” said Zelitsky, president of Canada-based Advanced Digital Communications. “It’s so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan.”

    ...Most intriguingly, researchers using sonar equipment have discovered, at a depth of about 2,200 feet (700-800 meters), a huge land plateau with clear images of what appears to be urban development partly covered by sand. From above, the shapes resemble pyramids, roads and buildings.

    ...“It is stunning. What we see in our high-resolution sonar images are limitless, rolling, white sand plains and, in the middle of this beautiful white sand, there are clear manmade large-size architectural designs. It looks like when you fly over an urban development in a plane and you see highways, tunnels and buildings,” Zelitsky said.

    “We don’t know what it is, and we don’t have the videotaped evidence of this yet, but we do not believe that nature is capable of producing planned symmetrical architecture, unless it is a miracle,” she added in an interview at her office at Tarara, along the coast east of Havana.



Dec 7 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/science/evidence-of-ancient-city-found-in-depths-off-cuba/article4157433/
	Evidence of ancient city found in depths off Cuba

	Michael Posner
	Published December 7, 2001
	Updated April 13, 2018

	...Using sophisticated sonar and videotape equipment, offshore engineer Paulina Zelitsky, her husband, Paul Weinzweig, and her son, Ernesto Tapanes, have found megaliths "of a kind you'd find at Stonehenge or Easter Island," Mr. Weinzweig said in an interview yesterday.

	"Some structures within the complex may be as long as 400 metres wide and as high as 40 metres," he said. "Some are sitting on top of each other. They show very distinct shapes and symmetrical designs of a non-natural kind. We've shown them to scientists in Cuba, the U.S. and elsewhere, and nobody has suggested they are natural."

	Moreover, an anthropologist affiliated with the Cuban Academy of Sciences has said that still photos taken from the videotape clearly show "symbols and inscriptions," Mr. Weinzweig said. It is not yet known in what language the inscriptions are written.

	The sonar images, he added, bear a remarkable resemblance to the pyramidal design of Mayan and Aztec temples in Mexico.

	Mr. Weinzweig said it is too early to draw firm conclusions from the evidence collected so far.

	...Geologists have recently hypothesized that a land bridge once connected Cuba to Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. And portions of the Cuban island are believed to have been submerged in the sea on three separate occasions in the distant past.

	The structures are on a plateau that forms the bottom of what is thought to be a mud volcano, 650 to 700 metres beneath the surface of the ocean and along what is clearly a geological fault line. "It's well known that ancient civilizations liked to build at the base of volcanoes, because the land is fertile. So that's suggestive," Mr. Weinzweig said.

	One tantalizing possibility, entirely speculative for now, is that if the legendary sunken continent of Atlantis is ever proven to have existed, these structures may have been submerged during the same cataclysm.

	Mr. Weinzweig simply says that more information is needed. "We'd prefer to stay away from that subject. This is something of great potential scientific interest, but it must involve serious authorities on ancient civilizations."

	The precise age of the underwater site is also unknown, although Cuban archeologists in 1966 excavated a land-based megalithic structure on the western coast, close to the new underwater discovery, said to date from 4000 BC. "Based on that and other geological information, we're speculating that these are 6,000 years old," he explained.

	"It's not exact, but they're very ancient."

	If that dating estimate proves accurate, it would mean that an ancient civilization had designed and erected these vast stone structures in the Americas only 500 years after human settlements first became organized in cities and states.

	They would also have been built long before the wheel was invented in Sumeria (3500 BC), or the sundial in Egypt (3000 BC). The three pyramids on Egypt's Giza plateau are thought to have been constructed between 2900 and 2200 BC.



similar article to above by Posner:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/195803753/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky

another similar by Posner:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/195803076/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky



Dec 7 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/canadians-spearhead-undersea-exploration/article25451381/base64/?
	Canadians spearhead undersea exploration

	Michael Posner

	From Friday's Globe and Mail

	Published Friday, Dec. 07, 2001 12:00AM EST

	Last updated Saturday, Mar. 21, 2009 11:49AM EDT

	...Using their collective smarts, and in partnership with Fidel Castro's government, the trio head Advanced Digital Communications, a company that is exploring Cuban waters for treasures archeological and golden.

	Ms. Zelitsky, 56, and Mr. Weinzweig, 58, met in the mid-1980s in Ottawa. Ms. Zelitsky, who is fluent in three languages, had already had a distinguished career in marine engineering. She had worked in Cuba at a submarine base installation in the late 1960s and was, says her husband, "familiar with the history of Cuba as a historic centre of trade, bridging the old world and the new."

	...At one time, he said, the technology needed for underwater exploration was "exclusively in the hands of the military. . . . Now, it's available on the civilian market, though it is not cheap."



Dec 8 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/science/sunken-city-made-by-nature-critics-say/article18419987/
	Sunken city made by nature, critics say

	Michael Posner
	Published December 8, 2001
	Updated April 13, 2018

	The discovery of what may be an ancient underwater city off Cuba's western coast is causing heated controversy in the world of marine archeologists.

	It was reported yesterday that a team of Canadian and Cuban researchers had taken sonar scans and videotape footage of mammoth stones submerged in 600 to 700 metres of water that seemed to be arrayed in architecturally designed formations.

	Paul Weinzweig, a member of the Havana-based Advanced Digital Communications, which is conducting the site exploration, said that some of the structures resemble Mayan temples.

	The megalithic stones, Mr. Weinzweig said, may date from as early as 4000 BC. His wife, project director Paulina Zelitsky, said the "structure looks like it could have been a large urban centre."

	But Martin Dean, director of the University of Britain's St. Andrews marine archeological unit, said yesterday that "the world's seas and oceans are full of underwater limestone formations. Some of them cover many square miles, which are mistakenly interpreted as sunken cities with monotonous regularity."

	Another critic, Alistair Crame, head of the Geological Sciences division of the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge, claimed the site is too deep to have any structures fashioned by humans.

	"It's very unlikely that the seabed would drop 650 metres in 6,000 years," he said.

	...But Ms. Zelitsky, a Soviet-trained offshore engineer, rebuffed the criticism. "I'm here in Cuba and what we've found is here. It's local, not in the United Kingdom. And it's not a matter of opinion -- it's objective reality."

	She said the project team, which includes Mr. Weinzweig, her son Ernesto Tapanes and representatives of Cuba's Academy of Sciences, was initially "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature," and thought the megaliths might be limestone.

	Cuban geologists have recently said the stones are "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation. Geologists think they are granite."

	The project team plans to return to the site, off the Guanahacabibes Peninisula, next month to conduct more sonar scans and videotape with cameras mounted in an unmanned vehicle.





Dec 9 2001:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/155209949/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Submerged city may lie of the coast of Cuba

	By Pichael Posner

	Toronto Globe and Mail

	quotes Weinzweig quoting "an anthropologist" saying the videotype shows "symbols and inscriptions"



May 20 2001:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/273531201/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Scientists find possible undersea city off Cuba

	By Andrew Cawthorne
	Reuters


	..."It's a new frontier," enthused Soviet-born Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zeilitsky, from British Columbia-based Advanced Digital Communications, pouring over video images of hitherto unseen sea floor taken by underwater robots.

	"We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters. ...It's so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan," she said.

	Most intriguingly, researchers using sonar equipement have discovered, at a depth of about 2,200 feet, a huge land plateau with clear images of what appears to be urban development partly covered by sand.

	"It is stunning. What we see in our high-resolution sonar images are limitless, rolling, white sand plains and, in the middle of this beautiful white sand, there are clear manmade large-size architectural designs. It looks like when you fly over an urban development in a plane and you see highways, tunnels and buildings," Zelitsky said.


Dec 07 2001:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/364253488/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Explorers find stone structures off Cuba

	By Andrew Cawthorne
	Reuters

	...From above, the shapes resembled pyramids, roads and buildings, they said.

	"It's a really wonderful structure which looks like it could have been a large urban center," said Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zelitsky, from British Columbia-based Advanced Digital Communications. "However, it would be totally irresponsible to say what it was before we have evidence."

	The explorers said that they discovered the structures last year at the depth of about 2,100 feet.




Dec 7 2001:

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/1697038.stm
	'Lost city' found beneath Cuban waters

	... They say they still do not understand the exact nature of their discovery, and plan to start a thorough analysis of the site - off the tip of the Guanahacabibes Peninsula - in January. 

	...The explorers first spotted the underwater city last year, when scanning equipment started to produce images of symmetrically organized stone structures reminiscent of an urban development. 

	...The images the robot brought back confirmed the presence of huge, smooth blocks with the appearance of cut granite.

	Some of the blocks were built in pyramid shapes, others were circular, researchers said.

	They believe these formations could have been built more than 6,000 years ago, a date which precedes the great pyramids of Egypt by 1,500 years.

	"It's a really wonderful structure which really looks like it could have been a large urban centre," ADC explorer Paulina Zelitsky told the Reuters news agency.

	"However, it would be totally irresponsible to say what it was before we have evidence." 




May 28 2002:

https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2002/05/0528_020528_sunkencities.html
	New Underwater Finds Raise Questions About Flood Myths

	Brian Handwerk
	for National Geographic News
	May 28, 2002

	... Cuba's Sunken City

	Deep in the waters of Cabo de San Antonio, off Cuba's coast, researchers are exploring unusual formations of smooth blocks, crests, and geometric shapes. The Canadian exploration company that discovered the formations, Advanced Digital Communications, has suggested that they could be the buildings and monuments of an early, unknown American civilization.

	Many scientists are skeptical of any theory that might tempt people to draw a parallel with the fabled lost city of Atlantis. Geologist Manuel Iturralde, however, has stressed the need for an open mind while investigations of the site continue.

	"These are extremely peculiar structures, and they have captured our imagination," said Iturralde, who is director of research at Cuba's Natural History Museum. Iturralde has studied countless underwater formations over the years, but said, "If I had to explain this geologically, I would have a hard time."

	In his report on the formations, Iturralde noted that conclusive proof of man-made structures on the site could reinforce some oral traditions of the Maya and native Yucatecos. These people still retell ancient stories of an island inhabited by their ancestors that vanished beneath the waves.

	Iturralde makes it clear, however, that just because no natural explanation is immediately apparent, it doesn't rule one out. "Nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures," he said.

	Further research is scheduled to take place over the summer. Data thus far has been collected using sonar scans and video. The structures are buried under 1,900 to 2,500 feet (600 to 750 meters) of water.  


Jun 30 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/148821174/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Images send explorer on search for City

	Anita Snow AP

	HAVANA -- Floating aboard the Spanish trawler she chartered to explore the Cuban coast for shipwrecks, Paulina Zelitsky pores over the yellowed tomes filled with sketches and tales of lost cities -- just like the one she believes she has found deep off the coast of western Cuba.

	Zelitsky's eyes grow wide as she runs her small hand over water-stained drawings of Olmec temples in a dog-eared 1928 study of Mexican archaeology. The Russian Canadian explorer compares the shapes with green-tinted sonar images captured in March while studying the megalithic structures she discovered two years ago off Cuba's Guanahabibes Peninsula.

	Amid piles of sonar-enhanced maps is a well-worn copy of "Comentarios Reales de las Incas," or "Royal Commentaries of the Incas," a classif oc Spanish Renaissance narrative by the son of an Inca princess and a Spanish conquistador. Zelitsky is particularly fascinated by Garcilasco Inca de la Vega's account of ancient ruins at the bottom of Lake Titicaca, Peru.

	"You would not think that a reasonable woman of my age would fall for an idea like this," chucked Zelitsky, a 57-year-old offshore engineer who runs the exploration firm Advanced Digital Communications of British Columbia, Canada.

	Zelitsky passionately believes the megalithic structures her crew discovered 2,310 feet below the ocean's surface could prove that a civilizatino lived thousands of years ago on an island or stretch of land joining the archipelago of Cuba with Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, about 120 miles away.

	...The company is among five foreign firms working with Fidel Castro's government to explore the island's coast for shipwrecks of historical and commercial interest. But the mysterious shapes have become the focus of this crew's exploratory efforts.

	Puzzled by the shapes with clean lines, the team has repeatedly returned to the site -- most recently in March -- for more sonar readings, more videotapes of the megaliths with an unmanned submarine.

	Evidence for Zelitzky's hypothesis is far from conclusive, and has been met with skepticism from scientists from other countries who nevertheless decline to comment publicly on the project until scientific findings have been made available. Submerged urban ruins have never been found at so great a depth.

	Elsewhere in the Caribbean, the ruins of Jamaica's Port Royal are located at depths ranging from a few inches to 40 feet below the ocean surface. The once raucuous seaside community was controlled by English buccaneers before it slid under the waves in earthquakes beginning in 1692.

	Located at just 20 feet are the mysterious megalithic structures discovered in the 1960s and 1970s in the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini. Scientific expeditions there have produced inconclusive results about the shapes' origins.

	Back in Cuba, a leading scientist recently admitted there is no easy explanation for the megalithic shapes found by Zelitsky's crew. The shapes on the sonar maps look like walls, rectanges, pyramids--rather like a town viewed from the window of an airplane flying overhead.

	"We are left with the very questions that prompted this expedition," geologist Manuel A. Iturralde Vincent, research director of Cuba's National Museum of Natural History wrote March 13.

	...In his written comments, later delivered at a scholarly conference here, Iturralde concluded it was possible the structures were once at sea level, as Zelitsky theorizes.

	Because of the large faults and an underwater volcano nearby, Zelitsky supposes that the structures sank because of a dramatic volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago.

	Providing some support for that argument, Iturralde confirmed indications of "significantly strong seismic activity."

	Zelitsky shies from using the term "Atlantis," but comparisons are inevitable to the legendary sunken civilization that Plato describedin his "Dialogues" around 3600 B. B.

	There have been untold, unsuccessful attempts over the ages to find that lost kingdom. One common theory is that Atlantis was located on the Aegean island of Thera, which was destroyed by a volcanic eruption nearly 3,600 years ago.

	Zelitsky does, however, mention known archaeological monuments when discussing her find.

	Perhaps, Zelitsky mused, the megaliths off Cuba are remains of a trading post, or a city built by colonizers from Mesoamerica. Those civilizations were far more advanced than the hunters and gatherers the Spaniards found upon arriving here five centuries ago.

	Zelitsky admitted much more investigation is needed to solve the mystery.

	But that doesn't keep her from believing, or from smiling slyls as she opens her agenda for 2002 to the first page.

	Written there are the words Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei uttered under his breath at the height of the Inquisition, right after abjuring his belief that the Earth revolved around the sun. "E pur si muove," it reads -- "Nevertheless, it does move."


has account of Zelitsky studying ancient American architecture, accounts of Incas

this one also says structures were "2,310 feet below the ocean's surface"

also mentions "mysterious megalithic structures" discovered 20 feet below surface in 60's and 70's in "the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini."

Says Zelitsky theorizes the structures she found were sunk by a volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago, and Iturralde "confirmed indications of 'significantly strong seismic activity.'"

last paragraph of article unusual



Oct 10 2002:

https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/10/10/in-cuban-depths-atlantis-or-anomaly/96b5cd79-9eb8-4fc7-8f18-8a3b3e9b4037/
	In Cuban Depths, Atlantis or Anomaly? - The Washington Post

	By Kevin Sullivan October 10, 2002

	..."What we have here is a mystery," said Paul Weinzweig, of Advanced Digital Communications (ADC), a Canadian company that is mapping the ocean bottom of Cuba's territorial waters under contract with the government of President Fidel Castro.

	"Nature couldn't have built anything so symmetrical," Weinzweig said, running his finger over sonar printouts aboard his ship, tied up at a wharf in Havana harbor. "This isn't natural, but we don't know what it is."

	...Manuel Iturralde, one of Cuba's leading geologists, said it was too soon to know what the images prove. He has examined the evidence and concluded that, "It's strange, it's weird; we've never seen something like this before, and we don't have an explanation for it."

	Iturralde said volcanic rocks recovered at the site strongly suggest that the undersea plain was once above water, despite its extreme depth. He said the existence of those rocks was difficult to explain, especially because there are no volcanoes in Cuba.

	He also said that if the symmetrical stones are determined to be the ruins of buildings, it could have taken 50,000 years or more for tectonic shifting to carry them so deep into the ocean. The ancient Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt is only about 5,000 years old, which means the Cuba site "wouldn't fit with what we know about human architectural evolution," he said.

	...But Iturralde stressed that the evidence is inconclusive. He said that no first-hand exploration in a mini-submarine had been conducted, which would provide a much more comprehensive assessment. He said a remote-operated video camera provides only a limited perspective, like someone looking at a close-up image of an elephant's toe and trying to describe the whole animal.

	...Earl has visited Cuba and described the preliminary evidence as "fantastic" and "extraordinary." But she stressed that as a "skeptical scientist," she would assume that the unusual stones were formed naturally until scientific evidence proved otherwise.

	"There is so much speculation about ancient civilizations," she said. "I'm in tune with the reality and the science, not the myths or stories or fantasies."


more suggestive title on same in this newspaper: https://www.newspapers.com/image/268977189/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky


Oct 20 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/284583128/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Underwater Pattern sugggests a city

	Vanessa Bauza

	...Suddenly her eyes caught a calendar by her desk featuring Mayan ruins. Something clicked. Could the massive structures Zelitsky and her husband, Paul Weinzweig, stumbled upon while hunting for sunken treasure really be remnants of an ancient city?

	"The structures we found on the side scan sonar simply are not explicable from a geological point of view," Weinzweig said. "There is too much organization, too much symmetry, too much repetition of form."

	...But they're stumped by the strange formations across an 8-square-mile area off Cuba's western tip. At her home in eastern Havana, Russian-born Zelitsky traced the sonar image with a pen to outline what she was could be an urban settlement with corridors and buildings. Videotape from a remotely operated, couch-sized mini-submarine deployed last summer shows cube and pyramid shapes behind a thin veil of silt and plankton.

	Experts on both sides of the Florida Straits agree the formations are highly unusual, but say there is not enough evidence to conclude they are manmade. A research expedition planned for July had to be canceled because ACD didn't get the Cuban government's permission to import additional equipment, including a manned submersible, Zelitsky said.

	Cuban geologist Manuel Iturralde of Havana's National Meseum of Natural History has analyzed the video, sonar images and rock samples from the site. While he's never seen anything like the repetative patterns, Iturralde wants to see more samples before making any conclusions.

	"We have some figures which are extremely unusual," Iturralde said. "But nature is much richer than we think."

	The depths at which the structures were found pose problems for an Atlantis-type hypothesis, he added. At the maximum velocity of Earth's tectonic movements it would have taken 50,000 years for the ruins to sink 2,000 feet underwater. However, "50,000 years ago there wasn't the architectural capacity in any of the cultures we know of to build complex buildings," Itturralde said.

	Michael Faught, assistant professor of anthropology at Florida State University and a specialist in underwater archaeology agreed.

	"It would be cool if they [Zelitsky and Weinzweig] were right," he said. "But it would be real advanced thing we would see in the New World for that time frame. The structures are out of time and out of place."

	Researchers at the National Geographic Society, whose planned trip to Cuba this summer fizzled due to bad weather and permit problems, say they hope to travel here next year.

	"The formation of the Earth took such violent turns at times, it could be many, many things. You will always have people contending that, for example, the pyramids were built by aliens," said John Echave, senior editor at National Geographic magazine, who came to Havana last fall and studied the sonar and video images.

	"We're at a point where we would very much like to solve this riddle."


appears to be Spanish version of same: https://www.newspapers.com/image/269349734/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky


says Cuban government didn't give permission to send more equipment, manned submersable



Nov 17 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141361/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Underwater world: man's doing or nature's?

	By David Ballingrud

	Paulina Zelitsky remembers the hot July day two summers ago and the sudden, unpleasant feeling that she had stumbled into a place she was not supposed to be.

	...As Zelitsky and her husband, Paul Weinzweig, watched the screen, the empty plain of sea bed suddenly gave way to images of massive geometric shapes, apparently cut from stone. As more shapes come into view, some appeared to be arranged in patterns over a large area about 20-kilometers square.

	Some stone appeared to be cut into blocks, and some blocks seemed perfectly aligned. They appeared to form corridors and the outlines of rooms, the two scientists said. There were round stones and pyramid-shaped ones, too.

	The sea botton in that area is an undulating sand plain, Zelitsky said. What they were seeing should not have been there.

	"We were shocked, and frankly we were a little frightened," said Zelitsky. "I was as though we should not be seeing what we were seeing. Our first thought was maybe we found some kind of secret military installation."

	Finding a military installation on the bottom of the sea might unnerve anybody, and for the 


https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141599/
	next six months the two researchers stayed busy with their work for the Cuban government and said little about their discovery. "But I tried to identify what we had seen," Zelitsky said. "Then one day, in our office, I looked up and saw pictures of ancient Mexican ruins on a calendar, and I made a mental connection."

	...believe they might have found the remnants of a lost civilization perhaps 6,000 years old.

	This site, perhaps built by a culture that far pre-dates the famous Maya of the Yucatan Peninsula, might have been the victim of a vast, mysterious cataclysim that somehow dropped it 2,000 feet beneath the surface of the sea.

	"Nothing is known for certain now," Weinzweig said, "but oral tradition in early Mexico speaks of an advanced civlization of tall white people who came from the East, and of an island that sank in a great natural disaster." In the ancient language of some early Central American Indians, he said, "the word Atlanticu means 'our good father,' or, 'the place where our good father rests.'"

	Then again, maybe not.

	Maybe the intriguing shapes found by the sonar are just that -- intriguing shapes, carved over the centuries by whimsical Mother Nature.

	Zelitsky and Weinzweig don't think so, though, and plan to visit the site again with a manned submersible equipped with camears and powerful lights -- when they have the money.

	Others have interest in such a project, but haven't committed to it.

	"They are interesting anomalies, but that's just as much as anyone can say right now," said John Echave, senior editor of National Geographic Magazine, who traveled to Cuba to study the sonar images.

	"But I'm no expert on sonar," he said, "and until we are able to actually go down there and see, it will difficult to characterize them."

	Echave pointed out that hard-to-explain undersea geologic formations have cropped up elsewhere in the world, too, in places such as Japan and nearby in the Bahamas.

	In the Bahamas, pilots and divers wondered for years about the so-called "Atlantis Road," a long row of seemingly connected stone blocks in about 15 feet of water. Gene Shinn of the St. Petersburg office of the U.S. Geological Survey became fascinated by the story and investigated in 1978. His conclusion: The blocks are natural, caused by a combination of sea level rise and erosion.

	Nevertheless, Echave said, "we are talking to Advanced Digital and we have an interest in their project. We have to get the protocols in motion, but at this point we have not dotted the i's and crossed the t's." Echave said since any project undertaken would be scientific, he did not expect problems with the Cuban or U.S. governments.

	Dr. Robert Ballard is explorer-in-residence for the National Geographic Society and is founder and president of the Institute for Exploration at Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Conn. He is best known, hwoever, for the 1985 dicovery of the passenger liner Titanic deep in the North Atlantic.

	Ballard said he has heard of the formations in the Yucatan Channel but is not convinced they are the work of humans.

	"That's too deep," he said of the 2,000-foot site. "I'd be surprised if it was human. You have to ask yourself, how did it get there?

	"I've looked at a lot of sonar images in my life," Ballard said, "and it can be sort of like looking at an ink blot--people can sometimes see what they want to see. I'll just wait for a bit more data."

	...They sent down a Remotely Operated Vehicle to examine and videotape the structures. Images sent back by the ROV confirmed the presence of large blocks of stone -- about 8 feet by 10 feet -- some circular, some rectangular, some in the shape of pyramids. Some blocks appeared deliberately stacked atop one another, others appeared isolated from the rest.

	"Large structures in the middle of a desert," Zelitsky called them. Because of their white appearance underwater, Zelitsky said the structures appear to be granite--a good building stone but one foreign to that part of the world.

	"There is no granite in Cuba or the Yucatan," Zelitsky said. "That area features limestone." Granite is found in Central Mexico, however, and was used by ancient people such as the Maya and an older civilization, the Olmec, in their construction of cities and buildings.

	The second visit to the underwater site proved only marginally revealing, however. Currents in the area are strong, Weinzweig said, and heavy sediment in the water made videotaping difficult.

	"We've done about as much as we can do with the technology we have," Weinzweig said. "The next step will be to go down there with a manned submersible, so we can move from place to place without a tether holding us back."

	...A land bridge from Mexico to Cuba?

	...In his book Gateway to Atlantis, Andrew Collins speculated that Caribbean might turn out to be the site of Atlantis and proposed that it might have been destroyed by a comet impact that devestated the eastern coastline with mammoth tsunamis or tidal waves.
	
	Zelitsky and Weinzweig dismiss the Atlantis talk.

	The story is a myth, said Zelitsky, a Russian-trained engineer. "What we have found is more likely remnants of a local culture," once located on a 100-mile "land bridge" that joined Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula with Cuba.

	This local culture, however, might be every bit as remarkable as Atlantis.

	The Maya, for example, developed a magnificent civilization on the Yucatan Peninsula beginning about A.D. 250 and peaking about A.D. 900. Spain finally completed its conquest of the Maya about 1500.

	...But Zelitsky thinks the Mega site pre-dates even the ancient Maya--by a lot.

	Recently excavated sculptures by the Olmec and Totonec peoples, also of the Yucatan and Central America, are about 4,500 to 6,000 years old, she said.

	"The Mayan nation came to the Yucatan at much later times and learned the arts and sciences of civilization from earlier nations." We know little of these nations, she said, "thanks to the Spanish church, who burned all their archives."

	Today Mexico and Cuba are separated only by the 100-mile width of the Yucatan Channel, and geologists have speculated for years that a "land bridge" once joined the two. According to this theory, underwater faults eventually parted and destroyed the bridge, swalloing the land above. But 2,000 feet? If the megaliths are indeed ruins, how did they get so deep?

	Zelitsky answers that large-scale underground movement of Earth's tectonic plates is usually accompanied by volcanoes and earthquakes.

	"It's a very powerful event," she said, and the sinking of an island "could have happened very quickly." While some megaliths on the sea bottom appear organized, she said, others do not. "Over about 20 square kilometers there are a large number of structures that appear jumbled, disorganized," she said.

	Cuban geologist Iturralde, she said, "has clearly identified on the ocean bottom the coastal structures of a separated island." Also, she said, the sea bottom at the site is covered with volcanic glass "which could be generated only on the oxygenated surface."

	Everyone should keep an open mind, said geologist Iturralde.

	"These are extremely peculiar structures, and they have captured our imagination," he said. "If I had to explain this geologically, I would have a hard time."

	But, he added, just because no natural explanation is immediately apparent, it doesn't mean there isn't one. "Nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures," he said.

	He also raised a third possibility. The megaliths might be natrual structures, he said, "but transformed or adapted by intelligent beings for dwelling or religious purposes."

	What next? For now, nothing

	...In finding the Maine and the Mega site, Advanced Digital has made use of two major improvements in underwater exploration. One is side-scan sonar ...and the other is satellite-based Global Positioning System, or GPS.

	...For now, though, Weinzweig and Zelitsky say they have their hands full keeping up with the terms of the contract with the Cuban government.

	..."For now we are busy with our other work," Zelitsky said. "As soon as we have done enough to help finance an archaeological expedition (to the Mega site) then maybe we can do that. Bur right now it's oil and gas."



has quote by Zelitsky saying she at first wondered if it were a secret military installation

has picture of initial sonar scan

https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141599/

has map of discovery site, puts it a bit northwest of western tip of cuba

has quote by Zeilitsky saying looks like made of granite which would be far away from where it was built

author goes on to try to tie discovery to Atlantis

author points out Olmec and Totonec statues were dated 4,500 to 6,000 years old, quotes Zeilitsky saying she thinks civ of sunken city was older than Maya

says geologists have speculated a "land bridge" joined the Yucatan and Cuba and was destroyed by underwater faults

Zeilitsky says some of the structures appear organized, some don't

quote Zeilitsky saying they are bound by contract with Cuban government, financing, "for now we are busy with other work"



------


https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gsa/geology/article-abstract/23/1/4/206173/reef-drowning-during-the-last-deglaciation?redirectedFrom=fulltext
	Reef drowning during the last deglaciation: Evidence for catastrophic sea-level rise and ice-sheet collapse 

	Elevations and ages of drowned Acropora palmata reefs from the Caribbean-Atlantic region document three catastrophic, metre-scale sea-level–rise events during the last deglaciation. These catastrophic rises were synchronous with (1) collapse of the Laurentide and Antarctic ice sheets, (2) dramatic reorganization of ocean-atmosphere circulation, and (3) releases of huge volumes of subglacial and proglacial meltwater. This correlation suggests that release of stored meltwater periodically destabilized ice sheets, causing them to collapse and send huge fleets of icebergs into the Atlantic. Massive inputs of ice not only produced catastrophic sea-level rise, drowning reefs and destabilizing other ice sheets, but also rapidly reduced the elevation of the Laurentide ice sheet, flipping atmospheric circulation patterns and forcing warm equatorial waters into the frigid North Atlantic. Such dramatic evidence of catastrophic climate and sea-level change during deglaciation has potentially disastrous implications for the future, especially as the stability of remaining ice sheets—such as in West Antarctica—is in question.


CRE1 at 14.2 ka, CRE 2 11.5 ka, CRE3 at 7.6 ka 


also called MWP-1A, MWP-1B 


http://www.college-de-france.fr/media/edouard-bard/UPL12769_Bard96Nature___copie.pdf


https://imgur.com/pkopDJm


https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=kO_JW9q-iDgC&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&dq=caribbean++Atlantic+holocene&ots=LUnci0nbrD&sig=LBeAhrHB1D-yM55EaGvUHEnnAXI#v=onepage
	...Linear-extension rates of corals in shallow water can exceed 10 cm/yr, but coral growth generally ranges from around 10 mm/yr in shallow water to less than 1 mm/yr at.

	...Citing anecdotal data from other studies, it was argued that most reefs in shallow water have been capable of building at rates greater than the maximum rate of glacio-eustatic sea-level rise during the Holocene (c. 7 m/kyr). Based on this, it was suggested that drowned reefs (or platforms) in the ancient record represent a 'paradox' that can be resolved only by invoking extreme and short-lived conditions associated with either rapid (and probably tectonically induced) sea-level rise or degraded environmental conditions (e.g. 'inimical bank waters' or larger-scale marine 'crisis  events').

	These concepts represent the foundation upon which most current models of Holocene reef development are based (Adey, 1978; Schlager, 1981; Macintyre, 1988).


http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.468.1771&rep=rep1
	A south to north gradient of increasing marine isotope substage (MIS) 5a (~ 80ka BP) sea level has been recorded across the Caribbean and surrounding region. Relative to present, MIS-5a sea levels range from -19 m to more than +3 m between Barbados, Haiti, the Bahamas, Florida, Bermuda and the US Atlantic Coast. In contrast, no gradientin sea level is observed for the last interglacial period MIS-5e (V128^118 ka BP) at tectonically stable localities in thesame region, with deposits generally lying several metres above present. We demonstrate here that these controversial observations are reconciled by taking into account the isostatic response of the Earth to glacial loading and unloading--a fundamental effect that is commonly overlooked in the interpretation of sea-level observations from different locations

	...Previous observations of MIS-5a sea level decline a south to north increasing gradient of more than 20 m from Barbados in the south to the US Atlantic coast in the north ( Fig. 2 ). The types of sea-level indicators include dated coral reef, dated coral rubble in marine facies, amino acid dated deposits (combined with stratigraphic considerations) and dated submerged speleothems. Recent evidence from Barbados indicates that the MIS-5a interstadial has a total duration of at least 7 kyr and may have consisted of two distinct sea-level highstands [6-9] of approximately -19 m and -18 m ( +/- 4 m) at ~84 ka and ~77 ka BP. ...At Haiti, observations from uplifted coral reefs indicate that MIS-5a sea level reached -13 m

	Further north, at several sites in the Bahamas, such as Eleuthera, aeolianites estimated to be of MIS-5a age indicate that local sea level was between -5 m and 0 m [11]. Dating of a submerged speleothem at Lucayan Caverns near Grand Bahama Island suggests that sea level there remained below -8.5 m (revised from an originally quoted depth of -15 m) during MIS-5a [12,13] . Based on the age of a submerged speleothem from Grand Bahama Island, MIS-5a sea level fell below -18 m by 79.4 ka BP [14] . This age can be corrected for initial thorium contamination to a revised value of V 73.6 ka ( [15] and D. Richards, personal communication).

	A submerged coral reef of MIS-5a age ( V 83 ka) o¡ the southeast Florida Keys indicates that sea level reached 6-10 m below present [13,16]. At Bermuda, stratigraphic considerations, aminostratigraphy and U-Th dating of samples from coral rubble deposits above present sea level show that sea level was near or above present during MIS-5a [16-18]. However, a submerged speleothem at Bermuda (marked with ‘?’ in Fig. 2) contradicts this with ages suggesting sea level remained below -15 m [19] for the duration of MIS-5a. These speleothem data have not been corrected for initial thorium contamination...


http://www.johnenglander.net/sea-level-rise-blog/single-image-proves-human-caused-global-warming/

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marine_isotope_stage

last peak in sea level around MIS-5e ~120 thousand years ago, trough ~60 thousand years ago. Around MIS-5a ~82 thousand years ago sea level was about ~150-200 meters less than previous peak.

Starting ~20 thousand years ago and picking up around holocene and CRE-1, sea level shot up to current peak, and this is when reefs were drowned in the caribbean.

so looks like what this data is seeing is fall in relative sea-level of Caribbean and Atlantic from when they were last conntected at last global sea-level peak at MIS-5a. This would imply they were connected, then separated, then the Caribbean started falling below that of the Atlantic.



https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0012821X12006863
	...Ongoing work focuses on the magnitude (and uncertainty) of glacio-isostatic adjustments (GIA) that affect comparisons between sites, but such developments are beyond the scope of the present study, which focuses on establishing the level of internal consistency and clear outlier determination.

	...It is clear that there is merit in analyzing each site
	separately; all three sites yield coherent sea level records covering
	the last deglaciation, and the Tahiti and Barbados records have
	good general agreement with the continuous sea level records
	(Fig. 5A and B). The Huon Peninsula record agrees well with the
	continuous sea level records for MIS 3, but has noticeable scatter
	in other time intervals (Fig. 5C). In particular, there is significant
	scatter within the Huon Peninsula data over a 50 m range around
	the time of the glacial inception after MIS 5e, which may reflect
	uncertainties that have not been adequately taken into account,
	as discussed above


do they know what data to put in GIA models or is it just a guess at this point?

barbados data smooth curve, agrees with data during last sea-level rise but puts it 10-20 m below sea level before then

barbados itself could have changed elevation? this says Barbados data maybe from plate techtonics: http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013NatGe...6..553A

Tahiti was lower than barbados about 10k years earlier


another big repository of coral data: http://www.highstand.org/erohling/Rohling-papers/2016-Hibbert-et-al-QSR.pdf

Fig. 12 says Yucatan Peninsula had much higher relative sea level than barbados and several other sites around globe 40-15 thousand years ago, although can't find source of their data

Fig. 7 says Jamaica had sea level ~15 m higher ~9k years ago: http://people.rses.anu.edu.au/lambeck_k/pdf/193.pdf (paper points this out as outlier with explanations)


http://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl-doc/pleins_textes/divers17-01/010069096.pdf
	In addition, Acropora palmata samples from below an unconformity at the base of shallow Barbados cores indicate a sea level position at about -60 m around 60 kyr before present (B.P.), after correction for the Barbados uplift rate assumed to be constant by Abdul et al. However, several independent sea level reconstructions [Siddall et al ., 2003; Cutler et al ., 2003; Lisiecki and Raymo , 2005; Bintanja et al ., 2005; Elder fi eld et al ., 2012; Spratt and Lisiecki , 2016] exhibit much deeper levels around -80 or -90 m during the same per- iod, which is indeed compatible with a higher uplift rate for Barbados.

Barbodos relative sea level came up 20-30 m higher than other samples 60k years ago, which contradicts idea that caribbean sea blocked-off and shrinking


https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379117300136
	Guantanamo Bay shows no evidence of the ∼100 ka or ∼80 ka sea stands.

	...Assuming a span of possible paleo-sea levels at the time of the last interglacial period yields long-term tectonic uplift rates of 0.02–0.11 m/ka, supporting the hypothesis that the tectonic uplift rate is low. Nevertheless, on the eastern and southern coasts of Cuba, east and west of Guantanamo Bay, there are flights of multiple marine terraces, at higher elevations, that could record a higher rate of uplift, implying that Guantanamo Bay may be anomalous.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terrace_(geology)#Marine_terraces


https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Matthew_Peros/publication/240579648_Archaeology_and_Climate_change_in_the_Caribbean_Lessons_from_the_past_for_problems_of_the_future/links/55f6274208ae6a34f6632922.pdf
	Sea-level changes following the last glacial maximum were dominated by the large transfer of water from land ice to the oceans associated with Termination 1. Observational records demonstrate that these sea-level changes had large spatial variability (order 100 m) 


should expect large variability between caribbean and atlantic shortly before holocene if true that caribbean separated and shrunk



https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921818113001185
	Relative sea-level (RSL) reconstructions from the circum-Caribbean region were interpreted using a glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) model with the aims to quantify the contribution of this process to both the temporal and spatial forms of the RSL observations and remove the GIA signal to estimate land ice volume change (eustasy) during the mid-to-late Holocene. To infer an optimal GIA parameter set, the RSL data were used to determine best-fitting Earth viscosity model parameters for two different global ice histories. The RSL data indicate a clear preference (95% confidence) for relatively high viscosity values: > 0.8 × 1021 Pas in the upper mantle and > 3 × 1022 Pas in the lower mantle. The data were not able to discriminate (at 95% confidence) between lithospheric thickness values ranging between 71 and 120 km, although the thickest value considered produced the best fits. RSL predictions based on the best-fitting model parameters indicate a spatial variability across the region of up to ~ 7 m during the early to mid-Holocene which is large enough to introduce significant error when using the entire dataset to produce a single regional RSL curve without correcting for GIA. When corrected for GIA, the most precise data from the region indicate about 3–4 m of land ice melt (eustasy) from ~ 7 cal kyr B.P. to ~ 3–2 cal kyr B.P., although we note that there is considerable scatter in these corrected data. This likely reflects GIA model limitations, such as the assumption of lateral homogeneity in a region that contains several plate boundaries, the influence of tectonic processes (which were not modelled), as well as errors and an underestimate of the uncertainty in the RSL reconstructions.


still had discrepencies in trying to measure relative sea level (that's sea level relative to dry land) around caribbean in early to mid holocene (7 to 3 thousand years ago)


if caribbean were consistently lower 14-80 thousand years ago, you'd think researchers would have noticed by now? so it seems unlikely




https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227192601_Review_The_Yucatan_Peninsula_karst_aquifer_Mexico
	The Yucatan Peninsula karst aquifer is one of the most extensive and spectacular karst aquifer systems on the planet. This transboundary aquifer system extends over an area of approximately 165,000 km(2) in Mexico, Guatemala and Belize. 


https://www.uky.edu/KGS/water/general/karst/karstintro.htm
	Karst Aquifers Are Different from Granular Aquifers

	A karst aquifer is roughly analogous to a roofed-over creek.


a lot of underground in that area hollow? ceotes said to be like sinkholes

if caribbean shrunk, would karst aquifers become hollow too?


http://www.backyardnature.net/yucatan/geology~.htm
	n general, the northern Yucatan Peninsula is characterized by these five notable features:

    It is flat and low
    Its bedrock is limestone
    The limestone is honeycombed with caves and sinkholes
    The limestone is very young, geologically speaking
    The Chicxulub Crater is centered on the coast of northwestern Yucatan

	THE YUCATAN IS LOW AND FAIRLY FLAT
	You can think of the Peninsula as a big slab of limestone gently tilted toward the sea all around. The farther south you go, the more likely you are to encounter low hills. By the same token, you must travel far offshore before you reach deep water.

	If you travel Hwy 24 between Mérida and Campeche you'll see some hills just to the east of the highway but the highest peak there is only 108 meters (354 feet). Farther inland, near Tekax, the highest hill, Cerro de Xal, is 250 meters (820 feet). The hills in this area are often called the Puuc Hills. Down south where the peninsula joins the mainland's body there are other peaks just north of Hwy 186 running between Chetumal and Francisco Escárcega reaching 250 meters and bit more.

	THE BEDROCK IS LIMESTONE
	Limestone is soluble in water so the Yucatan's limestone bedrock is honeycombed with caves and sinkholes -- it's classic karst topography. Yucatan's sinkholes have a special name -- cenotes (seh-NO-tehs). Cenotes are the result of caves collapsing, forming holes in the ground with water in the bottoms of the holes. Because the limestone has so many holes in it, there are no major rivers throughout the entire Yucatan Peninsula. Water runs underground.



https://www.twdb.texas.gov/conservation/education/kids/physical_model_video/PhysicalModelMain.pdf


this says karst aquifers can be under pressure

sometimes aquifers are under enough pressure to push out water well above ground-water level if a well is dug


so if ground is sitting on top of high-pressure water, what happens when that water is removed?



https://www.e-education.psu.edu/earth103/node/732
	Relative sea level changes can be caused by plate tectonic forces. For example, the Great Japan earthquake on March 11, 2011 caused part of the island of Honshu to rise up by nearly three meters. The sea floor can also drop when huge amounts of sediment are deposited by rivers and deltas. The weight of the sediment depresses the underlying crust often at a faster rate than the sediment is being deposited. This process is happening along the east coast of the US today in places along the coasts of Maryland, North Carolina and Georgia, and the Gulf Coast especially in the Mississippi delta region. In parts of Florida where large amounts of water have been pumped out of aquifers for water supply, the land is also subsiding rapidly.


increasing presure a lot can also cause problems:


https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn13371-heavy-rain-can-trigger-earthquakes/
	Hydraulic jack

	On non-karst land surfaces, rainfall presses down on the Earth in a relatively uniform fashion, and is generally fairly swiftly carried away by surface rivers and streams. As a result, the pressure of the rainfall on any underlying fault is small.

	But in karst, rain pours into the channels and caves. It does not run off the rock but runs into it, like water running through a complex plumbing network. As a result the pressure of the rain builds up inside the “pipes”. And this, says Miller, is what is making rain trigger earthquakes.

	He explains that increasing water pressure inside a rock is one of three ways to break it (squeezing and stretching the rock are the other two).

	Water pressure acts like a hydraulic jack, pushing the rock apart and allowing the pieces to slide past each other. If this happens on a large scale at a fault line, it can trigger an earthquake.


otherwise scientists say land collapsing into the ocean has happened before:


https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/dec/09/mediterranean-formation-deluge
	The Mediterranean Sea was formed by the most spectacular flood in Earth's history when water from the Atlantic Ocean breached the mountain range joining Europe and Africa with the force of a thousand Amazon rivers, scientists say.

	The devastating surge lasted as long as two years and at its peak caused the level of the Mediterranean to rise by more than 10 metres a day. The floodwaters moved at more than 100 kilometres per hour and created scars on the seabed that are still visible today.

	The deluge was triggered 5.3m years ago by subsidence in the seabed that caused a land ridge between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean basin to collapse. The ridge linked the Betic and Rif mountain ranges that hug the coasts of modern Spain and Morocco.

	As water began to pour across the strait , it eroded the ridge until the flow became a catastrophic deluge. At the time, the Mediterranean basin was an almost entirely dry expanse of low lying land, between 1.5km and 2.7km beneath today's sea level.

	The surge of water created a channel several kilometres wide that would become the Strait of Gibraltar. "The flow of water increased rapidly until it was truly catastrophic," said Daniel Garcia-Castellanos, a geophysicist at the Institute of Earth Science Jaume Almera in Barcelona. The slope to the Mediterranean was around two degrees, he reported in Nature. "The column of water going down that slope was several hundred metres deep, and in a channel like this would have reached speeds of more than 100km per hour."

	...Subsidence in the sea floor at the strait allowed water from the Atlantic to pour slowly into the Mediterranean basin for several thousand years, before the flow became a powerful surge that filled 90% of the Mediterranean very rapidly – between a few months and two years.



------

this says Caribbean separate from Atlantic at Holocene:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caribbean_Sea#Geology
	In the early Paleogene due to Marine regression the Caribbean became separated from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean by the land of Cuba and Haiti. The Caribbean remained like this for most of the Cenozoic until the Holocene when rising water levels of the oceans restored communication with the Atlantic Ocean.



this says it wasn't:


https://www.e-education.psu.edu/earth103/node/731


http://geologycafe.com/images/GLobalTopography.jpg


topography would probably have to be very different if whole caribbean was separated from Atlantic?


------

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998Geo....26..255T

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/249520545_Early_Holocene_sea-level_record_from_submerged_fossil_reefs_on_the_southeast_Florida_margin

https://osf.io/tqaqv/

https://osf.io/tfz8g/download/?format=pdf

why did these reefs drown


this is paper that started "drowning paradox" question--if sea level rate of rise was less than coral rate of growth, why are there so many drowned reefs (I think this was a world-wide thing?):

https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/gsa/gsabulletin/article-abstract/92/4/197/202662/the-paradox-of-drowned-reefs-and-carbonate?redirectedFrom=fulltext


Hubbard says a similar happened in buck Island that happened throughout the Carribean (Buck Island is in the Caribbean):

https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/sepm/jsedres/article-abstract/75/1/97/99403
	Holocene reefs around Buck Island initiated atop a broad antecedent bench at 13–16 meters below present sea level. Shelf flooding near Buck Island occurred as early as 9,500 years ago (CalBP), but preserved reefs lagged by as much as 1,800 years. Earliest reef development was dominated by branching Acropora palmata near the shelf edge and massive corals closer to Buck Island. By 7,200 CalBP, A. palmata apparently declined near the platform margin and was absent until ca. 5,200 CalBP throughout the study area.


If carribean flooded-out would be around 7,200 years ago?



Toscana says gab in coral data was inferred as massive sea level change 7.2-7.6 thousand years ago, but this can be explained by artifacts and limited sampling:


http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998Geo....26..255T
	A portion of this interval, represented by a gap in the Caribbean record of A. palmata</em> reefs, has been interpreted as reef drowning during an inferred catastrophic sea-level rise event of >45 mm/yr, or a 6.5 m rise between 7.6 and 7.2 ka, attributed to West Antarctic Ice Sheet instability and changes in marine ice extent between 8 and 7 ka. Continuous in situ shallow-water reef growth in Florida during this interval precludes the occurrence of exceedingly rapid rates of sea-level rise and is consistent with the North Atlantic record of deglaciation from 9 to 7 ka. Gaps in the early Holocene sea-level records for Florida and the Caribbean are thus more likely to be artifacts of limited sampling and/or core coverage, and not necessarily a result of drowning. 



MacIntyre and Toscana looked at sea level curves for caribean from coral:

https://repository.si.edu/bitstream/handle/10088/6792/556_Macintyre.pdf
COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTAL PATTERNS AND 
HOLOCENE SEA-LEVEL CHANGES CONTROLLING REEF HISTORIES 
ALONG NORTHEASTERN ST. CROIX, USVI 
BY
IAN G. MACINTYRE, MARGUERITE A. TOSCANO,
AND JOYCE LUNDBERG


https://repository.si.edu/bitstream/handle/10088/7687/00510.pdf


Gischler and Hudson did too, Tuscano and MacIntryre said they have bad data:

https://kundoc.com/pdf-holocene-development-of-the-belize-barrier-reef-.html
	Together with 33 other calibrated 14 C-dates from corals and basal peats from the Belize isolated platforms (Gisch- ler, 2003; Gischler and Hudson, 1998; Gischler and Lomando, 2000) , a sea-level curve is presented in Fig. 5 , which is drawn based on the assumption that all coral and peat dates have to plot slightly below sea level. Two A. palmata dates fall 10 and 15 m below the sea-level curve, respectively; however, even though these numbers are beyond the optimum depth of this coral ( < 5 m), they are still within the bathymetric limit reported for this species (Lighty et al., 1982) . Our curve differs from the A. palmata -based western Atlantic curve of Lighty et al. (1982) in that it is steeper from 10 to 7 ky BP and higher from 7 to 1 ky BP (Fig. 5) .


Also going on with Caribbean: usually, massive coral and deep water accretes slowly, while shallow branching coral accretes quickly, but in the caribbean over the past 7 milllion years coral in deep water accreted as fast as the coral in shallow water (this is the data that Tuscano said wasn't good enough):

http://eprints.uberibz.org/1103/1/gischler_2008.pdf


https://books.google.com/books?id=kO_JW9q-iDgC&pg=PA12&lpg=PA12
	Two fundamental principles that underlie our existing Holocene coral-reef models are:

	(1) reefs in shallow water (i.e. < 5 m) build an order of magnitude faster than their deeper-water counterparts (i.e. >10-15 m)

	(2) reefs dominated by branching corals accrete much faster than those primarily inhabited by slower-growing, massive species.

	This study has shown that in the Caribbean and western Atlantic these relationships have not been as strong over the past 10-12,000 years, as has been assumed. It is not clear whether this pattern holds for other oceans or other time periods.


then Hubbard goes on I think to use this to argue data all wrong:


	...Whether or not something akin to the scenario depicted in Fig. 11 ultimately emerged as the correct explanation, the lack of a substantial decrease in reef accretion according to either depth or species cannot be ignored, and may have profound implications for models of coral-reef accretion over the past 10,000 years, and perhaps longer.

	...Prior to 7000 cal yr BP, sea-level rose at a rate exceeding 5 m / kyr faster than accretion in most of the core intervals measured in this study. After 6000 cal. yr BP, this rate dropped below 1 m / kyr and was capable of keeping pace or exceeding on rising sea level. In some instances, accretion in reefs closer to sea level was probably constrained by a lack of accomodation space. While this undoubtedly skewed the pattern of shallow-water accertion rates reported in this study, its effect was not sufficient to return shallow-water accretion to a position of primacy



Hubbard in 2009:

https://books.google.com/books?id=kO_JW9q-iDgC&pg=PA12&lpg=PA12
	The 'drowning paradox'?

	Based on the assumption that 'many Holocene reefs can be shown to have outpaced even the fastest sea-level rise', Schlager (1981) proposed that reef drowning represents a paradox that can be resolved only be extreme events such as sudden and rapid sea-level rise or degraded oceanic conditions that severely compromise the accretionary capacity of a reef or platform. Based on the results of this study, reefs that acreet at rates of excess of 7 m/kyr are in fact rare.


Hubbard in 2012:


http://www.searchanddiscovery.com/documents/2012/50630hubbard/ndx_hubbard.pdf
	Long-standing models hold that, since the advent of a symbiotic relationship between corals and photosynthetic zooxanthellae, reefs close  to sea level have been capable of accreting at rates (up to 14 m/1000 yrs) that exceed normal sea-level rise (<10 m/1000 yrs).


If that was long standing model, Schlager paper is good question, Hubbard sounds like an asshole


Hubbard on this again in 2014:

https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/books/book/1970/chapter/11879174/holocene-accretion-rates-and-styles-for-caribbean
	Holocene Accretion Rates and Styles for Caribbean Coral Reefs: Lessons for the Past and Future 

	Early studies stressed the high accretionary potential of Caribbean coral reefs (10-15 m/kyr). Cores from St. Croix (US Virgin Islands) suggested that the earliest reefs along the shelf edge were dominated by rapidly growing Acropora palmata. As the bank flooded, soil mobilized by wave action moved off the bank, killed these reefs, and prevented subsequent reef development for at least 2000 years. Because the shelf east of St. Croix is similar to many Caribbean sites, it was proposed that this model was widely applicable throughout the region.

	More recent data from cores and outcrops throughout the Caribbean show that reefs on St. Croix and elsewhere flourished throughout the hiatus originally proposed to have occurred between 10,000 and at least 8000 years ago. Furthermore, data compiled from all known Caribbean cores suggest that reefs built at rates averaging only 3.47 m/kyr and that reef-accretion rates above 7 m/kyr were exceedingly rare. The pattern of reef building and abandonment over the past 20,000 years is consistent with these findings. Reefs easily kept up with sea level when it was rising at rates below 3-5 m/kyr, and back-stepping consistently occurred throughout the intervening interval when sea level rose at rates up to 10 m/kyr.

	While sudden shifts in sea level have been well documented in the geologic record and degraded water quality will undoubtedly compromise reef building, triggers for back-stepping need not be confined to these scenarios. The mechanisms for back-stepping are complicated and still poorly understood. In virtually every well-documented case for the Holocene, neither community structure nor water depth over the abandoned reefs and their landward replacements were significantly different. Each new reef formed as sea level rose over an antecedent feature that favored reef formation, and its success was largely determined by the rate of sea-level rise at the time accretion began. Reefs that formed when sea level was rising faster than 3-4 m/kyr were eventually abandoned.

	The scale of these reefs and the magnitude of back-stepping are similar to many ancient examples. Assumptions that these reflect sudden shifts in sea level or severe environmental conditions should be reexamined in light of the realization that back-stepping can also be explained by physical and biological processes that are observable within the lifetime of a single reef scientist.


maybe responding to this too which looked at Caribbean reef drowning and correlated with signs of catastrophic sea level rise:


https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/543214/95BlanchonGeology.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1525489623&Signature=ntr5TZZgEO7FcAw9xYi66c4Dp2g%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3B%20filename%3DReef_drowning_during_the_last_deglaciati.pdf
	Reef drowning during the last deglaciation: Evidence for catastrophic sea-level rise and ice-sheet collapse

	...These Heinrich (H) layers, as they are called, record the massive discharge of icebergs into the North Atlantic resulting from the collapse of the Laurentide ice sheet (Bond et al., 1992), which, accord- ing to some estimates, may have taken place in <100 yrs (Broecker et al., 1992). Such rapid purges of ice into the North Atlantic would cause CREs that drowned fast-growing Acropora  reefs in the Caribbean

	...The basic argument raised by Clark revolves around the reliabil- ity of deep-sea dates for determining deglacial events of very short duration (<500 years), particularly deposition of ice-rafted-sediment layers during ice-sheet-collapse. Clark accepts the reliability of these deep-sea dates and argues that ice-sheet-collapse occurred “well be- fore” the catastrophic sea-level rises (CREs) that we identified from drowned Caribbean reefs (Blanchon and Shaw, 1995). We, on the other hand, question the reliability of the deep-sea dates and argue that catastrophic sea-level rise was a result of ice-sheet collapse.



in that paper pointed out that CRE1 was late in Caribbean


http://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl-doc/pleins_textes/divers17-01/010069096.pdf
	The Tahiti sea level record updated with offshore drill cores [ Deschamps et al ., 2012] demonstrated that the age of MWP-1A is older by about 500 years than was previously thought based on the Barbados record. This implies that the series of A . palmata samples dated between 14.5 and 14 kyr B.P. in core RGF9 [ Peltier and Fairbanks , 2006] must have lived at depths of 10 to 15 m and that this species did not keep up with the pace of the deglaciation (see Weaver et al . [2003] and Deschamps et al . [2012] for a reinterpretation of the Barbados sea level record).


comparing Tahiti and Barbados puts it late by 500 years

authors go on to rag on Abdul for making many assumptions in his/her paper, but aren't the authors assuming the Caribbean and Atlantic were connected?


Abdul paper (above is a comment on it) talks about barbados timing more:


https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/2015PA002847
	...An analysis of relative sea level records from other far field sites such as Australia [Yokoyama et al., 2001] has suggested an older [Clark et al., 2009] or deeper [e.g., Nakada and Lambeck, 1988; Yokoyama et al., 2000] last glacial eustatic lowstand. The deviation of both the timing and the magnitude of change in eustatic sea level from the conventional −120 m at 20 kyr B.P. originally proposed by [Fairbanks, 1989] has led some to argue that Barbados is not immune to glacial isostatic distortions [e.g., Yokoyama et al., 2000; Clark et al., 2002]. A sea level correction of 10 m to relative sea level at Barbados for the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) is now predicted based on glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) modeling which incorporates the influence of a mantle viscosity on a downward thrusting slab simulating local deformation Austermann et al. [2013].

	Understandably, a 10 m model correction to relative sea level at Barbados as proposed by Austermann et al. [2013] is time, ice volume, and model parameterization dependent and expected to be much smaller when applied to sea level estimates made midway through the deglaciation over a span of 4000 years. According to Steffen et al. [2013], GIA model sensitivity to ice‐loading parameterization is significantly reduced after 13 kyr B.P., and for the time interval presented in this study (13.9 to 9 kyr B.P.), coupled ice and Earth model predictions suggest that relative sea level at Barbados exhibited little departure from eustasy [Peltier and Fairbanks, 2006; Milne and Mitrovica, 2008] and all but converges on the predicted ice‐equivalent sea level estimate as illustrated in Carlson and Clark [2012] by 13 kyr B.P. 


CRE1 comes late but Barbados sea level converges to global sea level by 13k years ago


	...Constructional reefs, such as those at Barbados, have modeled accretion rates ranging from 14 to 16 mm yr−1 [Hubbard, 2009]. High accretion rates, backfilled corallites, and an ecologically restricted depth habitat make the reef crest A. palmata arguably the best Pleistocene indicator of sea level, when sampled from the reef crest facies [Lighty et al., 1982; Fairbanks, 1989]. 



The reefs in Barbados should have high accretion rates so tells you something if they drown


	...The Barbados relative sea level reconstruction presented herein consists of 90 individually U‐Th‐dated A. palmata samples (see Text S1) obtained from six offshore drill cores and spans the interval from the mid‐Allerød to the earliest Holocene (13.9 kyr to 9 kyr B.P.) (Figure 1a and Table S2). Although 14 A. palmata age reversals can be identified within drill cores, after accounting for combined dating uncertainties, depth of A. palmata reef crest habitat (+5 m), and drill depth uncertainties (±1 m), all samples can be placed in stratigraphic order (Figure 1a and Table S2). Importantly, throughout the record A. palmata samples of similar age plot within 1 to 5 m of each other, strongly supporting that drilling successfully captured the shallow reef crest facies (Figure 1a). This is, perhaps, the most convincing evidence to date to confirm the restricted depth habitat of the A. palmata reef crest facies. 


also found that A. palmata rarely live at depth


	...Two deglacial MWPs were identified at Barbados [Fairbanks, 1989]. Whereas MWP‐1A was identified at Sunda Shelf [Hanebuth et al., 2000] and Tahiti [Deschamps et al., 2012], MWP‐1B was not captured in Tahiti bore hole cores [e.g., Bard et al., 2010], leading to controversy over its authenticity as a feature of the post‐Younger Dryas global sea level record [Lambeck et al., 2014]. MWP‐1B was first identified and defined as a 15 m jump in the Barbados sea level curve centered at 9500 14C yr B.P. (11.3 kyr B.P.), based on dated corals from two cores [Fairbanks, 1989, 1990]. U‐Th‐dated A. palmata data in six cores now confirm and better constrain the amplitude and timing of MWP‐1B as a 14 ± 2 m jump (Figure S2), occurring between 11.45 and 11.1 kyr B.P. with maximum rates of sea level rise approaching 40 mm yr−1 (Figure 1a). 


CRE2 was first recorded at Barbados but wasn't at Tahiti, which led to a controversy

cites this paper:


http://www.pnas.org/content/111/43/15296
	...A period from ∼11.4–8.2 ka BP of near-uniform global rise. The average rate of rise during this 3.3 ka interval was ∼15 m⋅ka−1 with little convincing evidence of variations in this rate. A rapid rise, MWP-1B, has been reported at ∼11.3 ka but remains elusive (27) and is not seen in the composite record other than as a slightly higher rate of increase to ∼16.5 mm⋅y−1 for a 500-y period immediately after the Younger Dryas period.

	...The Barbados record was not used in early iterations because it is from the outer edge of the geoidal bulge around the North American ice sheet...


which cites (ref 27) this paper by Edouard Bard*, Bruno Hamelin, Doriane Delanghe-Sabatier:

http://science.sciencemag.org/content/327/5970/1235?ijkey=99fc8d97eab0e18e5d03745090196f0d79de9029&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha
	The resolution of the few sea-level records covering the critical time interval between 14,000 and 9,000 calendar years before the present is still insufficient to draw conclusions about sea-level changes associated with the Younger Dryas cold event and the meltwater pulse 1B (MWP-1B). We used the uranium-thorium method to date shallow-living corals from three new cores drilled onshore in the Tahiti barrier reef. No significant discontinuity can be detected in the sea-level rise during the MWP-1B period. 


which is weird since same authors say in critique of Abdul's paper:


http://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl-doc/pleins_textes/divers17-01/010069096.pdf
	...The slow glacio-isostatic adjustment and the rapid responses due to gravitational changes of ice and water masses complicate the interpretation of individual relative sea level (RSL) records at speci fi c locations. Therefore, the Barbados and Tahiti record cannot be compared directly in terms of absolute sea level values as done by Abdul et al.




...


https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5267576/
	Caribbean coral reefs are among the most degraded reefs on the planet1,2



why are Caribbean reefs disappearing?



...


http://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl-doc/pleins_textes/divers17-01/010069096.pdf
	...Problem #2/Fossil samples of Acropora palmata may not be reliable sea level markers during rapid and large sea level rises. Indeed, the asexual reproduction strategy of this species may not be optimal to keep up when the water depth is increasing very rapidly. This may in part explain why the living depth of A. palmata at Barbados was significantly greater than 5 m during some periods of the last deglaciation, notably between 14.5 and 14 kyr B.P. and possibly between 14 and 11.5 kyr B.P. Pr


Barbados coral living > 5 m of water around CRE1




------


what was going on geologically in Caribbean?

Caribbean on its own plate, touching 5 others, very geologically active

earthquake there is what sunk that pirate town

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caribbean_Plate
	Roughly 3.2 million square kilometers (1.2 million square miles) in area, the Caribbean Plate borders the North American Plate, the South American Plate, the Nazca Plate and the Cocos Plate. These borders are regions of intense seismic activity, including frequent earthquakes, occasional tsunamis,[2] and volcanic eruptions.



http://www.nbcnews.com/id/50643496/ns/technology_and_science-science/t/ancient-caribbean-tsunami-likely-altered-ecosystems/

earthquake might have triggered this tsunami there 3-3.3 thousand years ago


http://www.scielo.br/pdf/aa/v18n3-4/1809-4392-aa-18-3-4-0119.pdf
	Following a number of recent papers on the geology of this area, we suggest tnat there are only two formations that are exposed over much of the upper Amazon Basin. However, rather than merely sr nullifying the previous interpretations of depositional history, our studies redirected our thinking toward the i mpl i cat iens of thick, extensive, and apparently very young strata. If, as we suggest, thes* sedimenti accumulated in a huge lake, tnen not only is the Late Pleistocene antf Holocene geologic history of the upper Amazon much different than what ίΐ now accepted, but the cüstri-ÍJutinn of modern plants and animals, and perhaps humans, reflects the presence of this recent topographic feature. 