In aggregate:

Zelitsky, her husbund Weinzweig, and her son founded company ADC. ADC is one of five companies doing research work for the Cuban government to find lucrative shipwrecks and oil and gas.

Zelitsky was a distinguished Soviet marine engineer who worked at a Cuban sub base in the late 60's. Weinzweig was a professor of sociology and philosophy, and their son is CFO of their business.

Before discovering the site, ADC in their contract discovered the shipwreck of the USS Maine, the sinking of which was a causus belli for the Spanish-American war.

Their contract with Cuba involves recovering shipwrecks, and they get 40% of whatever they recover. Funding became a problem for their Cuba venture, which was founded by ADC itself and some "private investors" (who?).

Brining up treasure would finance the project, but Zelitsky said their agenda was "much broader" and that she was anxious about global environment changes. By May 2001, Zelinsky said their efforts had yielded knowledge on the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of the formation of the Caribbean Islands, and numerous historic wrecks.

ADC was the first to survey the bottom of Cuban waters below 50 meters. Before, only the military had this capability, but by then the technology was commercially available. Their search was aided by GPS and side-scan sonar, two new technologies for the time.

The team discovered the site, located northwest of the Guanahacabibes Peninsula, in July of 2000 from "high resolution" sonar images. According to Zelitsky, the images showed "clear man-made large-size architectural designs" in the midst of a plain of white sand, similar to flying over an urban development in a plane and seeing highways and buildings below. The site was a 20 square kilometer area 700-800 meters below sea level. Zelitsky says they were startled by the discovery and their first thought was that it was some kind of military installation. Zelitsky said the team were at first "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature." Zelitsky "tried to identify what we had seen" and one day made the mental connection with ruins after seeing a picture of ancient Mexican ruins on a calendar.

They said little of the discovery for six months. By May of 2001, the team thought they had possibly discovered a sunken city. Zelitsky (others?) theorized it was populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture.

In July of 2001, the team returned with the Cuban Academy of Sciences and sent an ROV to take video images of the site. The images showed huge, smooth cut blocks with the appearance of granite. Most of the blocks were exposed and measured between 2 to 5 meters in length. Some of the blocks were cut in a perpendicular shape, others in a circular shape, and others a pyramid shape. Some of the blocks were stacked on one another.

Weinzweig told Michael Posner the images showed structures "400 meters wide and as high as 40 meters." Weinzweig said an anthropologist at the Cuban Academy of Sciences said some of the images show "symbols and inscriptions." Weinzweig said the team could only explore the perimeter of the site due to technical difficulties, but the team planned to return the summer 2002 with additional equipment, including a manned submersible and possibly an underwater excavator.

It would become a pressing question as to how the structures got to the bottom of the ocean, among the team and scholars alike. At the natural velocity of tectonic movements, it would take 50,000 years for land to sink 700-800 meters below sea level. Geologists had speculated in recent years that a land bridge once connected Cuba to the Yucatan peninsula, until underwater faults eventually destroyed the bridge. Because the site was located on a fault line at the base of an underwater volcano, Zelitsky supposed the site was sunk by a volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago. She said that over about 20 square kilometers, some of the megaliths appear organized and others do not.

At one point, rock samples were recovered from the site (when and by who?). Geologist Manuel Iturralde, who had analyzed these samples, said the ocean bottom near the site is covered with volcanic glass "which could be generated only on the oxygenated surface." According to Zelinsky, Iturralde had "clearly identified" structures of a separated island at the site. At a later scholarly conference in Cuba, Iturralde concluded it was possible the structures were once at sea level, and Iturralde confirmed indications of "significantly strong seismological activity."

The question of who might have built the structures was of interest to the researchers and commentators in the press.




	“We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters,” said Zelitsky, president of Canada-based Advanced Digital Communications. “It’s so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan.”

	Zelitsky's eyes grow wide as she runs her small hand over water-stained drawings of Olmec temples in a dog-eared 1928 study of Mexican archaeology. The Russian Canadian explorer compares the shapes with green-tinted sonar images captured in March while studying the megalithic structures she discovered two years ago off Cuba's Guanahabibes Peninsula.




	The sonar images, he added, bear a remarkable resemblance to the pyramidal design of Mayan and Aztec temples in Mexico.



	In his report on the formations, Iturralde noted that conclusive proof of man-made structures on the site could reinforce some oral traditions of the Maya and native Yucatecos. These people still retell ancient stories of an island inhabited by their ancestors that vanished beneath the waves.



	"Nothing is known for certain now," Weinzweig said, "but oral tradition in early Mexico speaks of an advanced civlization of tall white people who came from the East, and of an island that sank in a great natural disaster." In the ancient language of some early Central American Indians, he said, "the word Atlanticu means 'our good father,' or, 'the place where our good father rests.'"





	...But Zelitsky thinks the Mega site pre-dates even the ancient Maya--by a lot.

	Recently excavated sculptures by the Olmec and Totonec peoples, also of the Yucatan and Central America, are about 4,500 to 6,000 years old, she said.

	"The Mayan nation came to the Yucatan at much later times and learned the arts and sciences of civilization from earlier nations." We know little of these nations, she said, "thanks to the Spanish church, who burned all their archives."




	The precise age of the underwater site is also unknown, although Cuban archeologists in 1966 excavated a land-based megalithic structure on the western coast, close to the new underwater discovery, said to date from 4000 BC. "Based on that and other geological information, we're speculating that these are 6,000 years old," he explained.



	...	Located at just 20 feet are the mysterious megalithic structures discovered in the 1960s and 1970s in the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini. Scientific expeditions there have produced inconclusive results about the shapes' origins.


Olmec and Totonec "sculptures," underwater Bimini (Bimini road?), "land based megalithic structure on west coast"


what is the Bimini one? "Bimini road" northwest of North Bimini. "Cyclopean complex" (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1095-9270.1973.tb00507.x) said to be off coast of paradise point,  sort-of in between but in side bay of North Bimini.

or this thing: https://www.nature.com/articles/230287a0
	Underwater remains of an originally coherent formation of coquina limestone have been misinterpreted as an “enigmatic” stonework emplaced by prehistoric men. Marble and cement cylinders are found nearby. People who require the cylinders to be “pillar fragments” of an Olmec or Atlantean culture might consider a more mundane explanation.


this says paper is about Bimini Road: http://maya-gaia.angelfire.com/shinn_mystique_beachrock.pdf


this guy goes over things found near Bimini and controversy about underwater sites found there

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.585.4297&rep=rep1&type=pdf
	What are the sites being considered in this paper? They are purported to be the remains of high cultures, on the level of the Mayas, located under - water on the Bahama banks. These sites were presumably built when the banks were above water at a time of lower sea level, perhaps 10,000 years ago (c.f., Milliman & Emery, 1968). Much of the controversy has focused on a single site, known as the " road " or " wall " site near the island of Bimini, 45 miles east of Miami, Florida. A small amount of work has been done on a few other sites, including a " temple " near Andros island, and " columns " near Bimini. Numerous other roads, walls, geometrical patterns and pyra - mids have been described, most from aerial sightings, but have in general not been confirmed by independent sightings, nor is it possible to determine the exact locations from the published reports (Berlitz, 1984; Valentine, 1969, 1973, 1976). 


"road" got most attention, but "small amount of work" done on "temple" near Andros island and "columns" near Bimini


	...From almost the day it was discovered, the site has generated controversy. According to Marx (1971), rather than getting caught up in  the Atlantis controversy, Valentine and Rebikoff had hoped to keep the discovery of the road a secret. However, lacking capital for more intensive explorations, they joined forces with aircraft pilots Robert Brush and Trigg Adams, explorers who had been inspired by Cayce. Together they founded the Marine Archae- ology Research  Society (MARS). MARS expeditions  in 1969 discovered several more sites of interest near the road, including clusters of cement and marble columns in several locations. 


this is interesting--Bimini road controversy end up poisoning the well for legit things? a way to "bury" an archeological site for good--have a crackpot discover it


pg 5 says guy who debunked it "Harris" was not an archaeologist and skipped some things

an archaologist did his masters thesis on the road and found it was beachrock, then joined up with team that was inviestgating site, found a bunch more columns in patterns and a line of blocks going perpendicular to shoreline and published that

A guy named Zink who was an English professor taught himself archaeology, made numerous TV presentations then somehow became director of Bahamian antiques institute with gov then concluded the beachrock road was a road to atlantis made by aliens

but then Zink found some actually interesting things around the road and a "possible marble sculpture" and wrote up on it and "unfortunately his public presentation made it unlikely any mainstream archeologist would take his work seriously"


Richards talks about two camps fighting over Bimini road, with some findings being ignored by both sides.


pg 12 Valentine gave the location of a site off wildly


	...The problem of discriminating man-made ruins from natural geological formations is by no means unique to these sites. For example, Jones ( 1983), has described the ancient walls in the Menai straits of North Wales.  Even more than  the Bahamas sites, the Welsh sites have persistently been linked with Atlantis. The Welsh walls, which were submerged as the sea level rose, were apparently ancient fish traps. Their builders made use of natural be- drock formations, blending man-made walls in as necessary. Jones notes the difficulty of separating true discoveries of submerged walls from  natural forms said in legends to be sunken Atlantean cities. Jones7 careful study is the type of work sadly lacking in the Bahamas. What is different about these sites in the Bahamas is that the strong views on both sides, combined with the inherent unlikelihood of any ruins at all, have made it difficult to obtain objective descriptions or evaluations of the sites. The reader attempting to assess the evidence usually does not have the opportunity for on-site inspec- tion, and must rely on his perceptions of the reasonableness of the evidence and arguments from both sides. As I will show next, the ways in which the proponents and skeptics  have pursued these claims has emphasized  the extraordinary nature of the explanations, while downplaying the actual evi- dence and discouraging the resolution of the anomalies. 


Richard on to something?


	...Thus the existence of a  multiplicity of possible sites, most of which  have never been investigated, sets the stage for the long-term persistence of these claims. Ironically, it has not only been the uncritical nature of the popular accounts, but also the polemical tone of the response by the skeptics, which has perpetuated the controversy. 


Richard noticed that some archeologists are assholes


	...On the other hand, the proponents have not done well in the next phase of the investigation: the specialized work which could determine the origin of the sites. Zink (1 978) removed potential artifacts without regard to context, making it impossible to determine whether they were in any way associated with the site. 


Zink destroying an archeological site

	
	...Finally, a persecution complex would not be surprising because the pro- ponents are, in fact, persecuted. They have not, however, answered attacks such as those of McKusick with attacks of their own. Their attitude toward the scientific establishment is driven by the need, on the  one  hand,  for popular support in order to survive, and on the other hand, their recognition that scientific methods will be required to validate the anomalies and carry on advanced work. Nevertheless, it is certainly true that they tend to stand by their extraordinary explanations, and have not made a sustained effort to engage in a scientific dialog. Nor, of course, have their opponents. 


end up fighting instead of doing science



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marxist_archaeology
	With the rise of post-processual archaeology in the 1980s and 1990s, forms of Marxist archaeology were once more popularised amongst the archaeological community.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post-processual_archaeology
	Post-processual archaeology, which is sometimes alternately referred to as the interpretative archaeologies by its adherents,[1][2] is a movement in archaeological theory that emphasizes the subjectivity of archaeological interpretations. Despite having a vague series of similarities, post-processualism consists of "very diverse strands of thought coalesced into a loose cluster of traditions".


hmmm


this is interesting: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_American_social_archaeology


https://www.jstor.org/stable/282518?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

apparently there was a debate over how influential commie archeology was in Latin America



	Researchers at the National Geographic Society, whose planned trip to Cuba this summer fizzled due to bad weather and permit problems, say they hope to travel here next year.

	"The formation of the Earth took such violent turns at times, it could be many, many things. You will always have people contending that, for example, the pyramids were built by aliens," said John Echave, senior editor at National Geographic magazine, who came to Havana last fall and studied the sonar and video images.



	"They are interesting anomalies, but that's just as much as anyone can say right now," said John Echave, senior editor of National Geographic Magazine, who traveled to Cuba to study the sonar images.

	"But I'm no expert on sonar," he said, "and until we are able to actually go down there and see, it will be difficult to characterize them."

	Echave pointed out that hard-to-explain undersea geologic formations have cropped up elsewhere in the world, too, in places such as Japan and nearby in the Bahamas.



	Dr. Robert Ballard is explorer-in-residence for the National Geographic Society and is founder and president of the Institute for Exploration at Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Conn. He is best known, however, for the 1985 dicovery of the passenger liner Titanic deep in the North Atlantic.

	Ballard said he has heard of the formations in the Yucatan Channel but is not convinced they are the work of humans.

	"That's too deep," he said of the 2,000-foot site. "I'd be surprised if it was human. You have to ask yourself, how did it get there?

	"I've looked at a lot of sonar images in my life," Ballard said, "and it can be sort of like looking at an ink blot--people can sometimes see what they want to see. I'll just wait for a bit more data."



	The National Geographic Society has expressed interest and is considering an expedition in manned submarines next summer, according to Sylvia Earl, a famed American oceanographer and explorer-in-residence at the society.

	"It's intriguing," Earl said in an interview from her Oakland, Calif., home. "It is so compelling that I think we need to go check it out."

	Earl said a planned expedition this past summer was canceled because of funding problems. But she said National Geographic hopes to explore the site next summer as part of its Sustainable Seas research program.

	Earl has visited Cuba and described the preliminary evidence as "fantastic" and "extraordinary." But she stressed that as a "skeptical scientist," she would assume that the unusual stones were formed naturally until scientific evidence proved otherwise.

	"There is so much speculation about ancient civilizations," she said. "I'm in tune with the reality and the science, not the myths or stories or fantasies."






The question of what the structures were made of was also raised in press reports. December 2001 reports after the July ROV expedition said the blocks had a granite-like appearance. According to Posner, Ziletsky initially thought the megaliths were limestone, but Cuban geologists said the stones were "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation" and thought they were granite. 



	...The images the robot brought back confirmed the presence of huge, smooth blocks with the appearance of cut granite.



	She said the project team, which includes Mr. Weinzweig, her son Ernesto Tapanes and representatives of Cuba's Academy of Sciences, was initially "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature," and thought the megaliths might be limestone.

	Cuban geologists have recently said the stones are "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation. Geologists think they are granite."



	"Large structures in the middle of a desert," Zelitsky called them. Because of their white appearance underwater, Zelitsky said the structures appear to be granite--a good building stone but one foreign to that part of the world.

	"There is no granite in Cuba or the Yucatan," Zelitsky said. "That area features limestone." Granite is found in Central Mexico, however, and was used by ancient people such as the Maya and an older civilization, the Olmec, in their construction of cities and buildings.




