

https://www.sciencealert.com/world-s-largest-flooded-cave-discovered-under-mexico-yucatan-sac-actun
	Science alert

	Divers Found The World's Largest Underwater Cave, And It's Full of Maya Secrets 

	...Spanning an incredible 347 kilometres (216 miles) of subterranean caverns, this branching, sunken labyrinth isn't just a natural spectacle – it's also an important archaeological find that could reveal lost secrets of the ancient Maya civilisation.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cenote
	Cenotes around the world attract cavern and cave divers who have documented extensive flooded cave systems through them, some of which have been explored for lengths of 340 km (210 mi) or more.[7]

	...In contrast, the cenotes along the Caribbean coast of the Yucatán Peninsula (within the state of Quintana Roo) often provide access to extensive underwater cave systems, such as Sistema Ox Bel Ha, Sistema Sac Actun/Sistema Nohoch Nah Chich and Sistema Dos Ojos.
	
	Freshwater/seawater interface

	The Yucatán Peninsula contains a vast coastal aquifer system, which is typically density-stratified.[6] The infiltrating meteoric water (i.e., rainwater) floats on top of higher-density saline water intruding from the coastal margins.




https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20427361-300-port-royal-jamaica/
	Notorious as a hotbed of piracy and prostitution, the 17th-century Caribbean town of Port Royal was known as “the wickedest city on Earth”. Then, one day, it was swallowed up by the sea.

	Port Royal, located at the mouth of Kingston Harbour, Jamaica, was once the biggest English colony in the New World, with a population of around 10,000. Much of its wealth came from pirates and privateers who attacked treasure ships heading back to Europe from the Spanish Main. The city’s downfall came not from its loose morals but the fact that it was built on a sand spit (pictured right), less than a metre above the water table. When an earthquake struck the area just before noon on 7 June 1692, the tremors caused the sand to liquefy.

	“Buildings that were once on a solid foundation are now sitting on a liquid,” says Donny Hamilton, an archaeologist at Texas A&M University in College Station. “A building can drop 15 feet straight down without any of the bricks in the floor being displaced.” Two-thirds of the city sank into the harbour, killing 2000 people that day.



https://apnews.com/4e138c746a5a45ec9dce817349709554/colonial-church-emerges-falling-mexican-reservoir
	MEXICO CITY (AP) — Leonel Mendoza fishes every day in a reservoir surrounded by forest and mountains in the southern Mexico state of Chiapas. But in recent days, he also has been ferrying curious passengers out to see the remains of a colonial-era church that has emerged from the receding waters.

	A drought this year has hit the watershed of the Grijalva river, dropping the water level in the Nezahualcoyotl reservoir by 25 meters (82 feet).

	It is the second time a drop in the reservoir has revealed the church since it was flooded when the dam was completed in 1966. In 2002, the water was so low visitors could walk inside the church.

	“The people celebrated. They came to eat, to hang out, to do business. I sold them fried fish. They did processions around the church,” Mendoza recalled during a telephone interview Friday.

	The church in the Quechula locality was built by a group of monks headed by Friar Bartolome de la Casas, who arrived in the region inhabited by the Zoque people in the mid-16th century.




https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/03/160303-haiti-dominican-republic-lakes/
	Alberto Pierre, a skinny, wide-eyed 25-year-old, said the submerged village where he grew up wasn’t even near the lake. “The water used to be many kilometers from here.”

	Lake Azuéi, the largest lake in Haiti, lies about 18 miles east of Port-au-Prince, the capital, nestled along the border with the Dominican Republic. Also known as Étang Saumâtre, the lake rose so much between 2004 and 2009 that it engulfed dozens of square miles.

	“At first we put rocks so it wouldn’t come into our houses,” Pierre says. “But then the water just overran the rocks.” Families in the village of Letant began abandoning their houses, building huts on higher ground using wood, tarps, whatever they could find. By 2012, all 83 houses had been vacated.

	“We don’t know why the water is rising,” he says.

	In fact, nobody does. There seems to be no logic to the lake’s rise. Experts from the United Nations, a French engineering firm, a Dominican Republic university, a New York City college and many others have looked for clues to explain the rise of Lake Azuéi and neighboring Lake Enriquillo, just across the border in the Dominican Republic. But few of the theories seem to hold water. Some now hypothesize the phenomenon is related to climate change, but the evidence is counterintuitive: Unlike ocean levels, which rise with climate change, lakes tend to shrink.

	...Searching for an Explanation

	Lake Enriquillo and Lake Azuéi have always been anomalies. For starters, their water is not fresh, but saline, even though they have no known connection to the ocean. Lake Enriquillo is the largest lake in the Caribbean, and it is also region’s lowest point: in 2013 its surface was 112 feet below sea level.

	“The topography is unfortunate,” explains Piasecki. “Both lakes are flanked on the north and the southern side by steep mountains. It’s like a bathtub.”

	In a tiny, windowless office in Santo Domingo, Yolanda León sits behind a desk piled high with books and reports. León is a professor at the Technological Institute of Santo Domingo and for years has been the leading researcher studying the lakes.

	“Here it was chaos,” León recalls of the many attempts to explain the lakes’ dramatic rise. “Everybody had a hypothesis, and there was no data behind it.”

	One Dominican professor has been working to show that the 2010 earthquake had something to do with it, hypothesizing that it disrupted the underground aquifers. But that wouldn’t explain why the water started rising in 2004.



what's up with all the underwater caves and cities sinking in carribean?



------




http://www.academia.edu/4854165/Prehistoric_settlement_of_the_Atlantic_Coast_of_Nicaragua._Absolute_chronology_of_Pearl_lagoon_and_Bluefields_Shellmiddens
	Another remarkable aspect to consider is the location of the practical totality of the shellmiddens on continental soils of argillaceous nature. One of the three that do not respond to this pattern is located on the savannah of Haulover, which we interpreted as possible fossil sandbar of a paleo-lagoon. The other two, Coconut's Beach and Long Mangrove, have provided the most ancient radiocarbon dates and, contrary to what we expected, they are in very low zones with respect to the sea level. The totally organic composition of the matrix of its deposits suggests its deposit in flood contexts or the appearance of these after its formation. According to Magnus (1974) in Long Mangrove he collected some small sherds of ceramic in its superficial level. Nevertheless we have found no archaeological object either in the surface or in the samples of both shellmiddens. Given its location in a zone of of low salubrious flood, shellmiddens could be the result of the extraction of the meat from the clams near where they were collected to be consumed in another place.


https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google.com/&httpsredir=1&article=4300&context=gradschool_dissertations
	Underwater excavations were conducted at an Early Classic (A.D. 300 - 600) and a Late Classic (A.D. 600 - 900) submerged ancient Maya salt works in Paynes Creek National Park, Belize. The archaeological investigations included underwater excavations, artifact analysis, marine sediment chemical testing, and source identification of obsidian — an important indicator of trade. The excavation and analysis of the salt works in Paynes Creek add a new perspective on ancient Maya craft production and the economies of other ancient civilizations. 

	...The underwater sites in Paynes Creek National Park have the wooden architecture preserved because they are buried in anaerobic peat. Sea - level increased after the Late Classic abandonment and inundated the salt works, protecting them in mangrove peat and saline water.


http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/1697038.stm
	'Lost city' found beneath Cuban waters

	A team of explorers working off the western coast of Cuba say they have discovered what they think are the ruins of a submerged city built thousands of years ago.

	Researchers from a Canadian company used sophisticated sonar equipment to find and film stone structures more than 2,000 feet (650 metres) below the sea's surface. 

	...The images the robot brought back confirmed the presence of huge, smooth blocks with the appearance of cut granite.

	Some of the blocks were built in pyramid shapes, others were circular, researchers said.

	They believe these formations could have been built more than 6,000 years ago, a date which precedes the great pyramids of Egypt by 1,500 years.

	"It's a really wonderful structure which really looks like it could have been a large urban centre," ADC explorer Paulina Zelitsky told the Reuters news agency. 


https://web.archive.org/web/20010517055536/www.msnbc.com/news/573489.asp?cp1=1
	Looking for lost riches in Cuba’s seas

	...ONCE A HUB for shipments of gold, silver and other plunder from New World to Old, the Caribbean island’s waters likely hide billions of dollars’ worth of treasure from hundreds of ships that sank after encountering reefs, storms or pirates.

	But that is not all that tempts foreign companies, which, in a joint venture with President Fidel Castro’s government, are beginning an unprecedented, systematic search of one of the world’s most-fascinating, least-explored undersea regions.

	As well as gold-laden Spanish galleons, important secrets and insights into regional history, global environment trends, ancient geography and marine science also lurk in the depths.

	“It’s a new frontier,” Soviet-born Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zelitsky enthused as she pored over video images of hitherto-unseen seafloor taken by underwater robots.

	“We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters,” said Zelitsky, president of Canada-based Advanced Digital Communications. “It’s so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan.”

	SEARCHING FOR A LOST CITY

	Most intriguingly, researchers using sonar equipment have discovered, at a depth of about 2,200 feet (700-800 meters), a huge land plateau with clear images of what appears to be urban development partly covered by sand. From above, the shapes resemble pyramids, roads and buildings.

	ADC is excited but reluctant to speculate until a joint investigation with the Cuban Academy of Sciences and the National Geographic Society takes place early this summer.

	“It is stunning. What we see in our high-resolution sonar images are limitless, rolling, white sand plains and, in the middle of this beautiful white sand, there are clear manmade large-size architectural designs. It looks like when you fly over an urban development in a plane and you see highways, tunnels and buildings,” Zelitsky said.

	...THE BIGGER PICTURE

	Bringing up treasure will finance the project. But Zelitsky said, “Our agenda is much broader. We are very anxious about global environmental changes. Archaeology is providing us with the means to conduct broader scientific ocean exploration.”


https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Anthony_Andrews3/publication/232029084_A_Brief_History_of_Underwater_Archaeology_in_the_Maya_Area/links/55328d180cf2f2a588b052c0/A-Brief-History-of-Underwater-Archaeology-in-the-Maya-Area.pdf
	1995

	A BRIEF HISTORY OF UNDERWATER ACHAEOLOGY IN THE MAYA AREA

	Research in underwater archaeology has a long history in the May area, and has resulted in a series of spectacular discoveries that have attracted broad international attention. Many of the projects represent significant milestones in the development of the field. The first investigations began almost a century ago with Edward Thompson's exploration of the Cenote of Sacrifice at Chichen Itza, in northern Yucatan, and his recovery of a sensational collection of artifacts of late Maya civilization. Subsequent projects, which have ranged from the Gulf of Mexico and Carribean to the highlands of Chiapas, Guatamala, and El Salvador, have continued to focus on the recovery of ancient Maya remains, though a growing number of projects have also targeted historic wrecks at offshore sites.

	...The large cenote caves of eastern Quintana Roo, with their deep shafts and spectacular galleries, have long attracted divers. In 1986 cave divers Mike Madden and Pete Turner, while exploring Carwash Cave, near Tulum, located what appears to be a hearth at a depth of 27 m (De Loach 1986; Lockwood 1989:136, 141). A charcoal sample from the hearth has yielded a date of 8250 +/- 80 years B.P. (uncorrected), providing tantalizing evidence in support of a much lower sea level in Late Pleistocene/Early Archaic times (Coke et al. 1991).


https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/09/mexican-pyramid-mysteries-chichen-itza-archaeology/
	Built more than a thousand years ago by the ancient Maya, the pyramid towers 100 feet over the ruins of Chichén Itzá, a World Heritage site and popular tourist destination on Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula.

	Adventurers and archaeologists have explored the ruins for more than a century, but mysteries endure. Is there a watery labyrinth beneath the great pyramid, as local legends hint? Are there hidden chambers in the heart of the monument, as some archaeologists suspect?

	...The researchers will also use kayak-mounted sonar to explore known cenotes and locate underwater entrances to caves and tunnels that would have been accessible when the water table was much lower. By mapping the movement of water through subterranean passages beneath the site, they hope to identify connections between underground systems that are referenced in Maya oral history but never confirmed.


https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/46574301/Pilgrimage_to_the_Edge_of_the_Watery_Und20160617-28210-1cpfi3u.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1525425860&Signature=6vaqJ6Xq%2B%2BcjYlrMp2O8o1D93Fg%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3B%20filename%3DPilgrimage_to_the_Edge_of_the_Watery_Und.pdf
	The focus of recent exploratory dives and surface excavations has been at Pool 1 (100 × 70 m), a cenote 60 + m deep surrounded by seven structures ( Fig. 4 ), including Structure 1 that we argue functioned as a water temple and pilgrimage destination during the Late and Terminal Classic periods, especially between ad 800 and 900.

	...Invisible from the surface is another portal — a massive cave on the north wall starting at 30 m deep with an entrance 40 m wide, which we named Actun Ek Nen, or Black Mirror Cave ( Fig. 5 ). It continues to the pool floor and north into the cliff for over 70 m; divers have not yet determined how far the cave extends into witz. Divers also discovered a geological bed c. 20–25 m deep laden with fossilized megafauna bones, of which they collected rib, vertebra and humerus specimens from an Eremotherium or giant sloth (McDonald 2011 ). AMS dates on wood fragments and gastropods from the fossil matrix date between c. 9000 and 39,000 years bp (Lucero 2012 ), the more recent end of which would fall in the realm of human occupation (Lohse et al. 2006 ). Four diving programs conducted between 2010 and 2013 have yielded intriguing artefacts and implications despite its depth, the obstacle course created by massive trees littering the sides and bottom, and sometimes the poor visibility due to hydrogen sulphide clouds caused by decomposing vegetation or debris caused by underwater excavations (Lucero 2011b ; 2012 ; 2014 ).

	...We have to wonder if they knew of the vast underwater cave, Actun Ek Nen, and would not be surprised if they did; we know they left offerings on ledges high up on cave walls that require spelunking gear and skill to reach today (e.g. at Actun Tunichil Muknal).


http://www.news.com.au/travel/travel-ideas/actun-tunichil-muknal-the-belize-cave-of-ancient-human-sacrifices/news-story/d9684c4a96867c407c2017fff1913a7b
	Actun Tunichil Muknal: the Belize cave of ancient human sacrifices

	...The only way in is to swim...


https://archive.archaeology.org/online/features/belize/xibalba.html
	After a long day working at Actun Nak Beh, we entered Actun Tunichil Muknal, a cave with a stream running from it, at night. Time does not matter when you are going into darkness. With a gasp, I plunged into the cold water. My dry bag with my camera and a number of others' safely inside, bobbed on my back. Following our guide Christina, one of the graduate students who has been with the project for a number of years, we worked our way into the cave, over large rocks, climbing through tight passages, often waist-deep in water. We passed the area underneath the stelae chamber where underwater excavation was taking place and were cautioned not to go over it as we might damage equipment. We reached a ledge where everyone was required to take off their shoes, as to not damage the artifacts embedded in the cave floor's flowstone. Continuing on in our wet sock feet, we passed and inspected full vessels which had been claimed by the cave and many human bones and skulls. 


https://www.nationalgeographic.org/news/real-world-geography-guillermo-de-anda/
	Three years ago, after spending hours in the blue abyss, Guillermo found an extraordinary Mayan offering in one of the cenotes.

	“The offering is under the water, but when we examined it closely, we understood that it could not have been underwater when they placed it, the water level was lower.”

	Guillermo discovered the offering inside the very important Mayan city, Chichen Itza. (Today, a site in the state of Yucatan, Mexico.) The space was full of carefully placed items and bones that had never been touched prior to Guillermo and his crew of divers.



https://mexiconewsdaily.com/news/underwater-cave-is-worlds-biggest/
	Underwater cave is the world’s biggest

	...A team of experts from the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) has discovered a link between two systems of flooded caverns that together form the world’s largest underwater cave.

	The multidisciplinary team made the discovery during work on the Great Mayan Aquifer (GAM) project, in which archaeologists, biologists, underwater photographers and cave divers are exploring, documenting and mapping the extensive subterranean network of water deposits on the Yucatán Peninsula.

	...The interconnected system measures 347 kilometers and has an average depth of 20 meters, although in some sections it is as shallow as two meters and in others as deep as 100.

	...“Without a doubt, it’s the most important submerged archaeological site in the world,” de Anda said.

	“We’ve recorded more than 100 archaeological elements: the remains of extinct fauna, early humans, Mayan archaeology, ceramics and Mayan graves. It’s also very significant that this discovery enables us to see the possible patterns of past settlement. From the Pleistocene through to the ancient Mayans and up to the colonial era, they developed parallel to this enormous flooded fresh-water cave,” he added.

	De Anda also said that within the underwater system there are dry and partially dry caves where the research team has documented age-old modifications that include walls and staircases and discovered cave paintings and other signs of ancient human presence.


https://translate.google.com/translate?sl=es&tl=en&js=y&prev=_t&hl=en&ie=UTF-8&u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.inah.gob.mx%2Fes%2Fboletines%2F6927-promoveran-al-sistema-sac-actun-ubicado-en-tulum-mexico-como-bien-mixto-ante-la-unesco&edit-text=&act=url
	A thin strand floating in the darkness was the clue that now allows to affirm that Sac Actun, a system of flooded caverns that runs under the soil of Quintana Roo, Mexico, is the largest on our planet. A set of interconnected cavities totaling 347 kilometers, but if its connection to other neighboring systems is proven, it could be a "monster" of up to a thousand kilometers that contains human and faunal remains from different periods in its entrails.

	...Sac Actun, referred to by the director of the GAM, stands as an enormous octopus of limestone and fresh water, whose tentacles - probably - could be deployed to three other underwater cave systems in Tulum. Along the same 248 cenotes that serve as input have been located; and 198 archaeological contexts, of which 138 seem to be linked to the Mayan civilization and at least two, to skeletal remains of pre-ceramic individuals with a minimum age of 9,000 years.

	...To these will be added another context related to surface access where modifications are found: walls, passages and altars, which were used by the Mayans, but which could date from times prior to their occupation of the area.


http://www.theyucatantimes.com/2018/03/mayan-pilgrimage-center-was-discovered-in-sac-actun-underwater-cave-system/
	Recent investigations in the caves of Sac Actun revealed a ritual pilgrimage center and possible link between the prehistoric inhabitants of the area with the Mayan cosmology”, reported archaeologist Guillermo de Anda.

	...De Anda, director of the Great Maya Aquifer (GAM), research project of the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) of Mexico, explained during a press conference that the site covers 248 cenotes, entrances to the submerged caves, and 198 archaeological objects  have been found .

	Of these, 138 contexts are Mayan and the others belong to the preceramic period, which extends from the arrival of the first inhabitants from Asia more than 10,000 years ago until approximately 4,000 years ago.

	...There are also fragments of a censer that apparently has the representation of the Mayan god of commerce, Ek Chuak, part of an offering linked to a Mayan structure of the Postclassic period (900-1200 AD).

	He pointed out that this cave system is very close to the Caribbean coast, which during the Postclassic era was part of the navigation routes of Mayan merchants.

	“This was a point of entry into the interior lands, they had to follow well-established land routes, one hypothesis is that the merchants would have this as a point of ritual pilgrimage, and on their way inland, they would have to make stops at altars buily and in strategic sacred places” he said.

	On the other hand, in several sites located in Sac Actun human bone fragments that could belong to individuals who roamed the Peninsula thousands of years ago, can be observed.

	“The presence of preceramic individuals speaks of a constant interaction in this area for ten or 15 thousand years, or maybe even more” he said.

	...Last January, explorers of the Great Aquifer project revealed that Sac Actun, in the Yucatan Peninsula, was identified as the world’s largest 347-kilometer-long flooded cave system.


www.academia.edu/download/40576726/Collins_2015_a.pdf
	The skeletal remains of a Paleoamerican (Naia; HN5/48) and extinct megafauna were found at -40 to -43 mbsl in a submerged dissolution chamber named Hoyo Negro (HN) in the Sac Actun Cave System, Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico. The human remains were dated to between 12 and 13 Ka, making these remains the oldest securely dated in the Yucatan. Twelve sediment cores were used to reconstruct the Holocene flooding history of the now phreatic cave passages and cenotes (Ich Balam, Oasis) that connect to HN. Four facies were found: 1. bat guano and Seed (SF), 2. lime Mud (MF), 3. Calcite Rafts (CRF) and 4. Organic Matter/Calcite Rafts (OM/CRF) which were defined by their lithologic characteristics and ostracod, foraminifera and testate amoebae content. Basal radiocarbon ages (AMS) of aquatic sediments (SF) combined with cave bottom and ceiling height profiles determined the history of flooding in HN and when access was restricted for human and animal entry. Our results show that the bottom of HN was flooded at least by 9850 cal yr BP but likely earlier. We also found, that the pit became inaccessible for human and animal entry at z8100 cal yr BP, when water reaching the cave ceiling effectively prevented entry. Water level continued to rise between z6000 and 8100 cal yr BP, filling the cave passages and entry points to HN (Cenotes Ich Balam and Oasis). Analysis of cave facies revealed that both Holocene sea-level rise and cave ceiling height determined the configuration of airways and the deposition of floating and bat derived OM (guano and seeds). Calcite rafts, which form on the water surface, are also dependent on the presence of airways but can also form in isolated air domes in the cave ceiling that affect their loci of deposition on the cave bottom. These results indicated that aquatic cave sedimentation is transient in time and space, necessitating extraction of multiple cores to determine a limit after which flooding occurred.


https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Anthony_Andrews3/publication/232029084_A_Brief_History_of_Underwater_Archaeology_in_the_Maya_Area/links/55328d180cf2f2a588b052c0/A-Brief-History-of-Underwater-Archaeology-in-the-Maya-Area.pdf
	...COASTAL LOWLANDS

	Over 400 pre-Hispanic sites have been reported on the coasts and islands of the Yucatan Peninsula. These range from simple fishing camps to large urban communities, and date from Late Preclassic times to the Spanish Conquest. Several of these sites have the remains of port facilities (Andrews 1990, 1991), while others are partially underwater, owing to wave action, hurricanes, subsidence, and rises in sea level.

	...Farther north, between Campeche and Celestun, several sites have large submerged areas. These include El Cuyo, Yukumbalam, Jaina, and Candbalam (Andrews 1977; Andrews, unpublished field notes; Dahlin et al. 1995; Eaton 1978:28-29; Shook 1955). At El Cuyo (or Punta Cuyo) Jack Eaton (1978:28) has reported the remains of a submerged structure. Remains from these sites, including collections made from the submerged areas, attest to occupations dating from Late Preclassic to Early Post-classic times

	...Isla Cerritos, a small island 200 m in diameter, located 500 m offshore, 5 km west of San Felipe and the mouth of the Rio Lagartos. The site was the main port for the Terminal Classic-Early Postclassic inland capital of Chichen Itza. It has a history of continuous occuptation from the Late Preclassic period to approximately A. D. 1200, and contains extensive port facilities. These include sea-retaining walls, piers, and a 330-m-long seawall, or harbor wall, built some 80 m off the south shore of the island (ANdrews and Gallerata 1986; Andrews et al. 1988; Gallarata et al. 1989). Many of the shoreline features at the site are partially underwater, and cermaics and artifacts are found in all the surrounding waters

	...Along the central coast of Quintana Roo are a series of small rocky inlets and sandy coves that served as harbors in pre-Hispanic times. Most of these inlets and coves are surrounded by sites, or in some cases, have temple shrines at the inlet and larger sites in the nearby interior ...The largest inlet on the coast is located at Xelha, 10 km north of Tulum. The inlet is surrounded by a large archaeological site with an occuptation dating from Late Preclassic to Colonial times. Several prominent port features are located around the inlet, including a large defensive wall with a gate, a causeway leading from the inlet to the site, and a small shrine.

	Near the mouth of the inlet is a small grotto that is mostly underwater and only accessible by swimming from the inlet or descending through a sinkhole in the limestone roof of the chamber. In July of 1960 members of CEDAM explored the chamber, locating a small masonry platform or altar, two jade celts, one whole metate, fragments of another, and some ceramics dating to the Early Postclassic period.

	In 1975 a team of divers directed by nancy Fariss conducted a sonar survey of the inlet of Xelha, in search for pre-Hispanic Maya watercraft. The sonar equipment, devised by Harold Edgerton, led to the excavation of several deposits of artifacts at the bottom, including a collection of Late Postclassic ceramics and a variety of organic remains.

	...Belize Coast

	...Recent surveys and excavations of partially or fully submerged sites on the far south coast and nearby offshore cays have been reported by Heather McKillop and Lawrence Jackson. ...several of these sites served as important trading nodes in regional and long-distance trade during the Classic and Postclassic periods. McKillop's excavations have yielded substantial evidence of a major sea-level rise at the end of the Classic period, ca. A.D. 900.


http://www.ga.lsu.edu/mckillopwebpdfs/McKillop%201994%20Mexicon.pdf
	It was neither the ancient Maya's unlikely propensity for underwater living nor the SCAB project's love of working below the water table that focused the fieldwork in submerged locations: Instead, it was the realization that a rise in sea level had submerged substantial areas of the coast, dramatically reduced the land available for ancient settlement, and transformed the vegetation patterns. ...An understanding of the ancient vegetation and landforms is important to (1) help determine land available for settlement at various times in the past, (2) determine areas to survey for sites; and (3) reconstruct the ancient landscape of the coastal Maya.

	Several lines of evidence document a rise in sea level of about one meter since the end of the Classic Period, c. A.D. 900: Water-logged midden deposits at Tiger Mound Island are radiocarbon dated to A.D. 689 +/- 60 years. A series of radiocarbon dates from midden deposits at Wild Cane Cay attest to the widespread occurence of primary midden material below the modern sea level (McKillop 1987, 1944b). Stingray Lagoon is an underwater site located some 310 meters offshore in a coastal lagoon: the site is a single component Late Classic salt-making workship, now located in about 1 meter of water.

	...Fieldwork at Stingray Lagoon included transit-mapping of the underwater distribution of artifact clusters on the sea floor, test excavations, and surface collection. The inundation of the site marks the time of sea level rise after the Terminal Classic. The fact that the artifacts are large and well-preserved and the lack of Postclassic settlement suggests that the sea level rise was associated with abandonment of the site. 	


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-guatemala-archaeology/divers-probe-mayan-ruins-submerged-in-guatemala-lake-idUSTRE59T4P120091030
	Divers probe Mayan ruins submerged in Guatemala lake

	...Samayoa dived for years at the lake, often stumbling across pieces of pottery from the Mayan pre-classic period. In 1996, he found the site, with parts of buildings and huge ceremonial stones, known as stelae, clearly visible.

	He named it Samabaj, after himself, but only in the past year have professional archeologists taken an interest, mapping the 4,300-square-foot (400-square-meter) area with sonar technology and excavating structures on a raised part of the lake bed.

	Researchers believe this area, 50 feet below the lake’s surface, was once an island until a catastrophic event, like a volcanic eruption or landslide, raised water levels.

	The rising lake drowned the buildings around 250 A.D., before the height of the Mayan empire, and ceramics found intact there suggest the inhabitants left in a hurry. 


http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/cuba/lost-city.htm
	Ruins of ‘lost city’ found under Cuban waters

   HAVANA.- Using a robot submarine to explore Cuba’s seabed, researchers confirmed on Thursday the discovery of some stone structures which could have been constructed by an ancient and unknown civilization thousands of years ago.

   ...Zelitsky commented that the structures, presumably built on dry land before being covered by the sea, could have been sunk by volcanic activity in the area.

   ...One year later, in July 2001, the ADC team, its Cuban partner and experts from the Academy of Sciences of Cuba returned to the area on the ship called Ulises and sent a robot submarine, managed by remote control, in order to film parts of the 20-square-kilometer area.

   That footage confirms the presence of large blocks of granite in circular and perpendicular formations. Most of the blocks, between two and five meters long, were not covered. Others were covered with sediment and the area’s fine white sand.

   This intriguing discovery provides evidence that Cuba could have been linked to the Yucatan Peninsula by a strip of land, researchers said.

   "There are lots of new theories about land movement and colonization, and what we are seeing here should provide lots of new and interesting information," Zelitsky said.  





https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caribbean_Sea#Geology
	In the early Paleogene due to Marine regression the Caribbean became separated from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean by the land of Cuba and Haiti. The Caribbean remained like this for most of the Cenozoic until the Holocene when rising water levels of the oceans restored communication with the Atlantic Ocean.



https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/1999PA900017



http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.468.1771&rep=rep1&type=pdf

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379104003002


https://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1022&context=ees_papers
	The major breakthrough of work in the Caribbean/Atlantic region on both cored coral and sediment cores was the discovery of three ‘catastrophic rise events’, or Meltwater Pulses (MWPs), between 14,200 and 7600 cal years BP. The largest rise (approximate magnitude of 13.5 m) occurred at 14,200 cal years BP (MWP 1a). This coincides with a period of ice sheet collapse (Heinrich layer 1) as defined in sediment cores from the north Atlantic, and predates the Younger Dryas cold event by about 1000 years (Fig. 4). However, no consensus on the source of the ice melt has been reached, with contributions from North America, Scandinavia and the Barents Sea, and Antarctica having been proposed (Blanchon and Shaw, 1995; Clark et al., 1996 and Clark et al., 2002).  


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene
	The Holocene ( /ˈhɒləˌsiːn, ˈhoʊ-/)[2][3] is the current geological epoch. It began approximately 11,650 years before present



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=BmPpbB2cXu4C&pg=PA38&lpg=PA38
	A dramatic rise in worldwide sea level at the end of the Pleistocene also raised sea level along Maya coastlines, and rising sea level continued over the course of Maya prehistory to submerge low-lying coastal areas (McKillop 2002). As a result, some ancient Maya sites were inundated with water and still lie under coastal waters ...The sea level rise has removed many coastal sites from modern view, either placing them underwater or submerged in mangrove vegetation, and it also has dramatically altered the coastal landscape from the time of ancient Maya settlement (McKillop 2002). This is indeed a sobering reminder of the fate of low-lying areas worldwide, which are subject to sea level rise.

------


https://search.proquest.com/openview/7b24f3aad02e43f2595c58a28277e899/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y











------


https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2002/05/0528_020528_sunkencities.html
	New Underwater Finds Raise Questions About Flood Myths


Inca flood myth (I think a transcription by Spanish clergy?)


https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=6Wa9RwqdqEkC&oi=fnd&pg=PR11
	In "ancient times," when "very early people" lived, the world wanted to come to an end. A young llama was sad and would not eat because it knew that the ocean was about to flood the earth. The herder did not understand this llama buck and threw a maize cob at the animal. The llama said that in five days, the ocean would overflow and the whole world would come to the end. The llama said to go to the mountain Vilcacoto and to take food for five days. On their arrival, all varities of animals were already amassed on the mountain. The llama and herder huddled together and escaped the flood. The floodwaters covered all of the land with only the peak of Villcacotto remaining dry. The fox, clinging to the side of the mountain, dipped its tail into the water, and that is why it has its characteristic black tip. After five days, the waters receded and the ocean retreated all the way down again, exterminating all the people. Afterward, the one remaining herder began to multiply again.

	In ancient times, the Sun died and it was night for five days: "Rocks banged against each other. Mortars and grinding stones began to eat people. Buck llamas started to drive men. Here's what we Christians think about it: We think these stories tell of the darkness following the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Maybe that's what it was"


says from this:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huarochir%C3%AD_Manuscript
	The name of the original Indian author is unknown, but the document was recorded and annotated by Spanish cleric Francisco de Ávila, who was responsible for the eradication of pagan beliefs.[1] For centuries, the manuscript was forgotten in the royal library of Madrid.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_de_%C3%81vila
	Avila was born in Cuzco. He was curate or vicar in the province of Huarochiri of Peru, later curate at Huánuco, and finally Canon of the Church of La Plata (now Sucre), in Bolivia. He was one of the most active investigators of Indian rites and customs of his time. He died in Lima.


Avila honest or liar?




this one refers to geological events too:


https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=6Wa9RwqdqEkC&oi=fnd&pg=PR11
	Establishment of a New Social Order

	Conflict and Competitions: The Ancestor Mountains, Huallallo Carhuincho, and Paria Caca (Chapters 6, 8, 9, and 16–17) In very ancient times, there were hua- cas called Yana Ñamca and Tuta Ñamca. Later, another huaca, called Huallallo Carhuincho, defeated them. Huallallo Carhuincho was introduced as a huaca from remote but not “very ancient times.” He was “the man eater, the man drinker” who commanded the Lurín (Lower) Yauyos to restrict the number of children per household to two, one of which had to be handed over to the deity for him to eat as meals. Huallallo Carhuincho dwelled in the region of Upper Paria Caca. This place was, and still is, known as Mullo Cocha, Lake of the Thorny Oyster Shell. This was because Huallallo Carhuincho burned like fire in his con- flict with the deity Paria Caca and was ultimately defeated when the place was turned into a lake. At this time, the whole region was populated by people known as Yuncas who were identified with the warmer lower and coastal valleys. The land was full of subtropical animals of the coast like huge snakes and toucans. During this time, Paria Caca, the principal deity of Yauyos society, was born in the form of five eggs on the mountain Condorcoto. When he was fully grown, he began to search for his enemy. The five persons of Paria Caca swung their hunting bolas, and hail fell from the sky. Paria Caca discovered a man crying be- cause he was carrying one of his children to Huallallo Carhuincho to be eaten. Paria Caca ordered him to return to this spot, where in five days the two deities would do combat. He told him, “If I overwhelm him with floods of water, you must call out to me, ‘Our father’s beating him!’ But if he overpowers me with a blaze of fire . . . ‘The fighting’s over!’” (1991, 67). So Paria Caca challenged Hual- lallo Carhuincho and his accomplice, Mana Ñamca. In the guise of five persons, Paria Caca brought rain and lightning from five directions:

		From early in the morning to the setting of the sun, Huallallo Carhuincho flamed up in the form of a giant fire reaching almost to the heavens, never letting himself be extinguished. And the waters, the rains of Paria Caca, rushed down toward Ura cocha, the lower lake. Since it wouldn’t have fit in, one of Paria Caca’s five selves, the one called Llacsa Churupa, knocked down a mountain and dammed the waters from below. Once he impounded these waters they formed a lake (Mullo Cocha). As the waters filled the lake they almost submerged that burning fire. And Paria Caca kept flashing lightning bolts at him never letting him rest. Finally Huallallo Carhuincho fled towards the low country, the Antis. . . . He stays at the pass down to the lowlands, the Antis, until today. Lest Huallallo Carhuincho return. (1991, 68)



	...Viracochas traveled along the coast (Cuntisuyu), through the jungle (Antisuyu), and through the central highlands (Chinchaysuyu), but no mention was made of the powerful chieftains of the Collasuyu. Urton suggests that a tradition cen- tered on Titicaca or Tiahuanaco was later readapted to the new sacred and polit- ical focus, which was Cuzco (1999, 39–40). Perhaps the special punishments handed out to the Collas contributed to an Inca-oriented tradition that appears to have marginalized this despised nation. In fact, the idea of Titicaca as the limit of the Andean world was also part of Huarochirí tradition. From the per- spective of the foothills above Lima, the Huarochirí informants believed that Titicaca was located at the end of the world. More specifically, the world ended at Ura Cocha, waters that lay under Lake Titicaca. The coast off Pachacamac was named as the other place where the world ended.



according to this myth: rains rushed down into a "lower lake," I guess supposed to be "the waters below" Titicaca or Mullo Cocha. A god "dammed the waters from below" by knocking down a mountain and the waters filled the lake.

Is this myth about some world-ending judgement like the others? it describes a fight with a god which is different from first one.



another myth about this mountain god:

	...Competition between the Yauyo Huatya Curi and the Yunca Tamta Ñamca (Chapter 5) In the earliest times, the Purum Runa (People of Desolation) spent their lives in violence and warfare. Only the wealthy and strong were respected. They were unaware that the mountain deity Paria Caca, in the form of five fal- con eggs, sat quietly, waiting to hatch on the mountain Condorcoto. The only person to recognize the deity was a homeless fellow named Huatya Curi (Baked Potato Gleaner), a man so destitute that he lived by scavenging potatoes to bake in the earth. Huatya Curi was also the son or alter ego of the deity Paria Caca.



this say anything?


	...The supernatural double-headed serpent was known by the Incas as the amaru. The amaru was (and still is) thought to be a huge subterranean serpent associated with water and the sudden, violent overturning of established order.


this one was recorded by Augustin de Zarate:

	
	...Agustín de Zárate recorded that during a great flood, people took refuge in high caves to survive the rising water. Dogs were dispatched to see whether the waters had subsided: “They sent out dogs who returned wet and with no mud on them, from which they concluded that the waters were still high. They dared not emerge from their caves until their dogs came back covered with mud” (1968, bk. 1, chap. 10, 48).


looks like same paraphrased here:


https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=E__dnnQwGDwC&oi=fnd&pg=PA183&dq=mesoamerican+flood+myths&ots=-mJuhZ45c8&sig=f_YHE7V2etbjnSYq8R0wIsVgTm8#v=onepage&q=dog%20mud&f=false
	They also say that it rained so much once that all the lowlands and all men were submerged, except a few who managed to take refuge on the high mountain ranges. They covered the small entrances of the caves so that water would not enter and put within them provisions and animals. When they heard that the rain had stopped they sentforth two dogs. As the dogs returned, clean but wet, they  knew that the waters had not subsided yet. Later they sent forth more dogs, and when the latter returned, muddy but dry, they realized that the deluge was over.


This says was viceroy in Peru after Vela, got accused of treason, and wrote "History of the discovery and conquest of the province of Peru" in jail: 

https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=es&u=https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agust%25C3%25ADn_de_Z%25C3%25A1rate&prev=search



in Inca, they associated earthquakes with Pachacamac:

https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=6Wa9RwqdqEkC&oi=fnd&pg=PR11
	The Andean region suffers from regular seismic activity, which can be catastrophic. The earthquake as a natural disaster is what Andeans perceive to be a pachacuti (turning around of the world). This represents an apocalypse that destroys and separates one world order from the next. It should be noted though that reference to pachacutis as earthquakes by the chroniclers is not as common as reference to other natural catastrophes such as floods.

	On the central Peruvian coast, the deity Pachacamac was associated with earthquakes. This was a pre-Hispanic tradition and the present-day manifesta- tion of this cult in the form of the Señor del los Milagros (Lord of the Miracles) has taken its fame to new heights. Pachacamac was believed to cause earth- quakes by shaking his head from side to side. In Huarochirí, the Pachacamac cult had offshoots. One of these was called Llocllay Huancupa and was ad- dressed as the “world animator and world shaker.” When Tupa Inca Yupanqui was subduing the Huarochirí region, the huacas were asked to go to Cuzco. They all responded “yes.” However, Pachacamac spoke: “‘Inca, Mid-Day Sun! As for me, I didn’t reply because I am a power who would shake you and the whole world around you. It wouldn’t be those enemies alone whom I would de- stroy, but you as well. And the entire world would end with you. That’s why I’ve sat silent’” (Huarochirí Manuscript 1991, chap. 23, 115). The Huarochirí Manu- script also described Pacha Cuyuchic, the World Shaker, probably another name of the same deity: “When he gets angry, earth trembles. When he turns his face sideways it quakes. Lest that happen he holds his face still. The world would end if he ever rolled over” (1991, chap. 22, 113).



	...A tradition recorded in the Cuzco ceque shrines described a large quinoa tree that was associated with the symbolic life force of Cuzco, its running water. This shrine was the seventh huaca on the sixth ceque of Chinchaysuyu: “The seventh guaca [huaca] was called Çapi [Saphi], which means ‘root.’ It was a very large quinua root which the sorcerers said was the root from which Cuzco issued and by means of which it was pre- served. They made sacrifices to it for the preservation of the said city” (Cobo 1990, bk. 13, chap. 13, 58–59). The location of this shrine was the course of the small stream Saphi, which rose in the hills above Cuzco and flowed into the city to become the River Huatanay. A separate myth tells us that the River Saphi was where Pachacuti Inca confronted a giant that represented the swollen wa- ters of the river. Pachacuti prevented the giant from blowing his trumpet, which would have signaled the flooding of Cuzco. Thus, the stream was both a physi- cal and symbolic source of life for the city and a potential threat. The stream was believed to have emerged from a sacred quinoa root, and it was this shrine that received the sacrifices for the preservation of the city.


fear of floods part of their religion?


	...The fox may have been despised, but he nevertheless appeared frequently in the Huarochirí mythology. In the story of the Great Flood, when the animals saved themselves by climbing the mountain Villcacoto, the fox slipped down and his tail, a highly symbolic part of anatomy in the Andes, dipped into the water and got wet. This, we are told, is why the tip of his tail is black. The fox also slid down a slippery slope during the courtship of the deity Paria Caca and the beautiful Chuqui Suso: Paria Caca called on the animals to build an irrigation canal for him. The fox pushed himself forward as leader of the work party, but he was frightened by the partridge. Yelling, “Wac!” he tumbled down the hillside: “Then those animals got indignant and had the snake di- rect the way. If the fox hadn’t fallen, that canal of theirs would’ve run at a higher level. But now it runs somewhat lower. The spot from which the fox fell is clearly visible to this day. In fact the water flows down the course the fox’s fall opened” (Huarochirí Manuscript 1991, chap. 6, 63).


maybe element of punishment for wicked in myth, fox representing crafty people


	...A different tradition of ancestral origins is found in the fragmentary ac- counts of shrines located on the Cuzco ceques (conceptual lines). Here Huana- cauri was described as the father of the ancestral Ayar siblings. Cobo wrote of Atpitan, the sixth shrine on the first ceque of Collasuyu: “It consisted of certain stones which were in a ravine, where one loses sight of Huanacauri. They relate that these stones were men [who were] sons of that hill, and that in a certain misfortune which befell them they turned into stones” (1990, bk. 13, chap. 15, 70). The tradition of mountains as apical ancestors whose sons acted as local founding ancestors is common throughout the Andes. This tradition of Huana- cauri may be the remnants of an older story before the Incas had established their superiority and before they remolded the narrative of their own origins. Another ceque shrine called Matao suggests that Huanacauri provided a safe haven during a great flood: “It is a slope near Huanacauri where there were some ancient buildings, which they relate was where those who went out from Huanacauri after the flood slept at the end of the first day’s journey” (Cobo 1990, bk. 13, chap. 15, 75). Another ceque shrine was described as “a fountain named Vilcaray puquiu which is near the said slope, where they say those who left Guanacauri drank” (Cobo 1990, bk. 13, chap. 15, 75).


author says "may be remnants of an older story" but not sure exactly what evidence he refers to

this reference to flood also involves climbing mountian to escape 


	...It is possible that this tradition may have referred to the actual dynasty of Moche lords who were the most powerful group that flourished on the north coast for around six or seven centuries from about A . D . 100. The story of the flood may not be fictitious, either. The phenomenon of El Niño causes periodic devas- tation on the coastal strip of central and northern Peru where rainfall is normally scarce. Prolonged and heavy precipitation and a rise in sea levels were highly de- structive for the predominant building material, a mixture of perishable mud and sand. From ice core samples and from the investigation of sites through archaeol- ogy, we know of catastrophic El Niños in Peru around A . D . 500 and A . D . 1100.


author says flood myths might be referring to extreme weather in Peru in 500 and 1100 A.D.


	...Andean cosmogony revolves around oscillations of time/space in which periodic catastrophes define moments of transition separating different epochs. This con- cept was expressed by the Quechua term pachacuti, derived from pacha (world, time and space, or state of being) and cuti (change, turn, or something that comes back on itself). For instance, the lexicographer Gonzalez Holguín trans- lated the word pachacuti as a natural cataclysmic disaster in the form of a flood, a fire, pestilence, or an earthquake. Pachacuti was also the name of the ninth Inca, Yupanqui, who reorganized all facets of the Inca world. His father, Vira- cocha Inca, renamed him with the epithet “Pachacuti,” which Betanzos trans- lated as “the turn or change of time.” The highland digging stick, tacilla, with its curved hook is also thought to represent the concept, cuti. Thus the term pachacuti is used by Andeans to describe the hoeing and plowing of the soil, that is, the turning or transformation of the earth.


Inca might have associated disasters like flood, fire, pestilence, or earthquakes with changes in different epochs and "pachacuti"


	...For instance, Betanzos described the dis- service to the deity Con Tici Viracocha from the first people who inhabited the world in an age of darkness. They were turned into stone, and then stone models were made of new people who would later populate the provinces in an age of sunlight. However, there was no mention of the term pachacuti. A later chroni- cler, the indigenous writer Pachacuti Yamqui, referred to “uno pachacuti,” which was a great flood that ended the first world age of Purun Pacha and brought into being the second epoch of Aucapacha. Pachacuti Yamqui followed other chroniclers who described two world ages in which the first epoch was characterized by the absence of sunlight. For Pachacuti Yamqui, the first age, Purun Pacha, was characterized by warfare when people were busy making fortresses and phantasms or ghosts called hapiñuños were visible over the earth.



Betanzos described Inca myth similar to Maya myth of ancient people displeasing a god and being destroyed to make new people. Chronicler Yamqui called a great flood "uno pachachuti" which brought in a new epoch.


http://www.academicroom.com/article/pachacuti-miracles-punishments-and-last-judgment-visionary-past-and-prophetic-future-early-colonial-peru
	The soldier-historian Cieza de Leon, who traveled extensively in the lands of the Incas during the early years after the invasion, outlined myths of the flood from Chucuito, Jauja, and the lowlands. But, unlike subsequent less critical observers, he suggested that these accounts could not refer to the universal flood of Noah but rather reflected distant memories of "some flood particular to this land, like that of Thessaly."sO In this way, Cieza, like late antique Christian chronographers, made allowance for accounts of the past that differed from scripture but at the same time left the absolute truth of scripture unquestioned. Andeans in their turn applied their own categories to biblical history. While European historians and scholars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries investigated the precise year of Noah's flood, Andeans could classify this event without reference to the year of its occurrence either as a pachacuti pure and simple or else as the end of the first and beginning of the second age of human history.31 Andeans understood Noah's flood as a marker in time, not a date.


Ciezo de Leon interviewed Andeans and decided flood myth referred to "some flood particular to this land, like that of Thessaly." (Thessaly is a flood-prone area in Greece). Andeans saw flood as beginning of second age of human history (this accurate of their belief? Maya said it was third)




------


Maya flood myth similar:


https://www.khanacademy.org/partner-content/big-history-project/what-is-big-history/origin-stories/a/origin-story-mayan
	Then there came a great destruction. The wooden carvings were killed when the Heart of Sky devised a flood for them. It rained all day and all night. The animals came into the homes of the wooden carvings and ate them. The people were overthrown. The monkeys in the forest are a sign of this. They look like the previous people — mere wooden carvings.



above and this translation different (e.g. latter has gods casting dice to make man): http://en.bookfi.net/book/1312513



http://www.vopus.org/en/gnosis/gnostic-anthropology/popol-vuh-sacred-book-of-the-mayas.html
	The authenticity of this masterwork of Mayan thought has long been accepted by authors such as Brinton, Müller, Raynaud, Rodas, Villacorta, Recinos, and others who have shown that even though it was written during the Colonial era it is completely native and foreign to Western thought.


?






Delia Goetz: 

http://en.bookfi.net/book/1312513
	And instantly the figures were made of wood. They looked like men, talked like men, and populated the surface of the earth. 
  They existed and multiplied; they had daughters, they had sons, these wooden figures; but they did not have souls, nor minds, they did not remember their Creator, their Maker; they walked on all fours, aimlessly.  
  They no longer remembered the Heart of Heaven and therefore they fell out of favor. It was merely a trial, an attempt at man. At first they spoke, but their face was without expression; their feet and hands had no strength; they had no blood, nor substance,19 nor moisture, nor flesh; their cheeks were dry, their feet and hands were dry, and their flesh was yellow.  
  Therefore, they no longer thought of their Creator nor their Maker, nor of those who made them and cared for them.20  
  These were the first men who existed in great numbers on the face of the earth.

  Immediately the wooden figures were annihilated, destroyed, broken up, and killed.  
  A flood was brought about by the Heart of Heaven; a great flood was formed which fell on the heads of the wooden creatures. 
  Of tzité, the flesh of man was made, but when woman was fashioned by the Creator and the Maker, her flesh was made of rushes.1 These were the materials the Creator and the Maker wanted to use in making them. 
  But those that they had made, that they had created, did not think, did not speak with their Creator, their Maker. And for this reason they were killed, they were deluged. A heavy resin fell from the sky. The one called Xecotcovach came and gouged out their eyes; Camalotz came and cut off their heads; Cotzbalam came and devoured their flesh. Tucumbalam2 came, too, and broke and mangled their bones and their nerves, and ground and crumbled their bones.3



Dennis Tedlock:

http://en.bookfi.net/book/289509
	This was the peopling of the face of the earth:
    They came into being, they multiplied, they had daughters, they
  had sons, these manikins, woodcarvings. But there was nothing in their
  hearts and nothing in their minds, no memory of their mason and
  builder. They just went and walked wherever they wanted.*(98) Now they
  did not remember the Heart of Sky.
    And so they fell, just an experiment and just a cutout for
  humankind. They were talking at first but their faces were dry. They
  were not yet developed in the legs and arms. They had no blood, no
  lymph. They had no sweat, no fat. Their complexions were dry, their
  faces were crusty. They flailed their legs and arms, their bodies were
  deformed.
    And so they accomplished nothing before the Maker, Modeler who
  gave them birth, gave them heart. They became the first numerous
  people here on the face of the earth.
    AGAIN THERE COMES A HUMILIATION, destruction, and demolition. The
  manikins, woodcarvings were killed when the Heart of Sky devised a
  flood for them. A great flood was made; it came down on the heads of
  the manikins, woodcarvings.
    The man's body was carved from the wood of the coral tree*(99) by
  the Maker, Modeler. And as for the woman, the Maker, Modeler needed
  the pith of reeds*(100) for the woman's body. They were not competent,
  nor did they speak before the builder and sculptor who made them and
  brought them forth, and so they were killed, done in by a flood:
    There came a rain of resin*(101) from the sky.
    There came the one named Gouger of Faces: he gouged out their
  eyeballs.
    There came Sudden Bloodletter: he snapped off their heads.
    There came Crunching Jaguar: he ate their flesh.
    There came Tearing Jaguar: he tore them open.
    They were pounded down to the bones and tendons, smashed and
  pulverized even to the bones. Their faces were smashed because they
  were incompetent before their mother and their father, the Heart of
  Sky, named Hurricane. The earth was blackened because of this; the
  black rainstorm*(102) began, rain all day and rain all night. Into
  their houses came*(103) the animals, small and great. Their faces were
  crushed by things of wood and stone. Everything spoke: their water
  jars, their tortilla griddles, their plates, their cooking pots, their
  dogs, their grinding stones, each and every thing crushed their faces.



http://mayaarchaeologist.co.uk/index.php/2017/05/29/comparing-contrasting-three-different-translations-second-creation-popul-vuh/
	Events in the Popul Vuh have been linked to iconography and art from as early as the Middle Preclassic in the Maya lowlands (600 B.C.) (Hansen 1992:141), to ritual events among the modern Maya, such as the Zinacantecos (1990 Vogt:111).  Aside from the reliability of using the document to explain cultures from a different area and in a time far removed from the period the document was written in, the Popul Vuh is not purely Maya.  There are strong Nahuatl and Spanish influences in the document (Edmonson 1985:130).  This paper takes a step back from the controversies surrounding the Popul Vuh and assesses three different English translations of a section known as the Second Creation.  These translations are Edmonson’s (1971), Tedlock’s (1996), and Goetz and Morley’s translation (1960) of Recinos’s Spanish translation of the Quiché text.  Striking differences are apparent when comparing these translations. This is partly due to the ambiguities in written Quiché and partly due to the aims of the translator in translating the document and the type of audience to which the translation is intended.  My research has highlighted the importance in comparing as many translations of the same text as possible (if one is not able to work from the original text), when trying to puzzle together the original structure and content of a document under study.

	...The second measure one should take before assessing these translations is identifying the reasons for the translation.  Translations are always biased to the aims and needs of the translator.  Poetic license also comes into play and the resulting translation can often be quite far removed from original text.   It is important then to be aware of the rational behind these translations.  Edmonson sees the Popul Vuh as primarily a work of literature and of poetry, it cannot be accurately understood in prose.  He states that the document is entirely composed in parallelistic (semantic) couplets.  Indeed, ambiguity may be reduced if the author is writing completely in couplets and so this is what he does (1971:xi).  Edmonson’s main reason for translating the Popul Vuh was to address its style; none of the previous translations have dealt with this aspect.  He has used the preferred order of the English sentence to preserve the poetry of the Popul Vuh.  He also took liberties with Quiché grammar, transitive and active verbs are changed to passive and intransitive so that the parallelism would work better.   His interest is primarily ethnological rather than linguistic (1971:xi).   Edmonson acknowledges that he is not proficient in Mam, Yucatec, Nahuatl, or a speaker of Quiché. He is interested purely in a literal translation of style and not interpretation.  As commendable it is to produce a literal translation and keep the Mayan narrative style, Edmonson’s translation is not without its limitations.  Firstly, the literal word-for-word translation can be stilted and incomprehensible in places.  Metaphors and kennings need not be literally translated and at times a figurative translation is better (see example 14, pp.14).  Secondly, although in agreement with Edmonson that much of the Popul Vuh is in couplets, not all of it is.  At times couplets are forced together which can narrow the scope and meaning of the text.  The text being divided into lines works well for tight couplets that are semantic/syntactic parallels and even ones that are partially so.  Yet this does not work so well for triplets or with a line that has no semantic/syntactic parallelism with the previous line (Class notes 2004).



translations very different

Edmonson tried to translate literally

this one seems better:

http://www.mesoweb.com/publications/Christenson/PopolVuh.pdf
	THEN came the end of the effigies carved of wood, for they were ruined,crushed,122 and killed. A flood was planned by Heart of Sky that came down upon the heads of the effigies carved of wood.123The body of man had been carved of tz'ite wood124 by the Framer and the Shaper.The body of woman consisted of reeds125 according to the desire of the Framer and the Shaper. But they were not capable of understanding and did not speak before their Framer and their Shaper, their makers and their creators.Thus they were killed in the flood. There came a great resin down from the sky.126There came the ones called Chiselers of Faces, who gouged out their eyes.12


	...123 The destruction of the earth by flood prior to our present age was a widespread tradition inMesoamerica: “There was among them information of the flood and of the end of the world, and theycalled it Butic, which is the word which means flood of many waters and means ‘judgment,’ and so theybelieve that another Butic is about to come, which is another flood and judgment, not of water, but of fire,which they say would be the end of the world, in which all the creatures would reprove, especially thosewhich serve man, like the stones on which they grind their corn and wheat, the pots, the vessels, giving tounderstand that they will turn against man, and that the moon and sun would be eclipsed, saying that theywould be eaten” (Las Casas 1967, III.ccxxxv.507; cf. III.cxxiv.650. Translation by author). The YucatecMaya Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel records that the people of that age “were buried in the sand atthe shore of the sea, in the waves. Then in a great sheet of water the waves came. When the great serpentwas taken away, the heavens fell and the earth was submerged” (León-Portilla 1969, 50; cf. Roys 1967,170). Aztec tradition also has the inhabitants of the fourth age of the earth destroyed by flood: “These arethose who lived in the fourth Sun, called 4-Water. They lived 676 years, until they were destroyed. Theywere swallowed up by the waters and became fish. The heavens collapsed upon them and in a single daythey perished” (Velázquez 1945, 119-120). Although the Popol Vuh has the wooden effigies destroyed in aflood (see also p. 85; lines 706-709, 728-731), lines 710-723 have them crushed and devoured bymonstrous beasts, while lines 736-823 describe their ruin at the hands of their own domesticated animals,grinding stones, utensils, and other possessions

	...126 Some confusion appears in the text as to the nature of the flood that destroyed the wooden effigies.Here the flood is composed of resin, sap, or turpentine (secretions of pine trees). Page 87 (lines 728-731)however describes a watery flood caused by heavy rainfall.


apparently the Quiche word for this flood was that it was a flood of resin


	There came Death Knives,128 which cut off their heads. There came Crouching129 Jaguar,who ate their flesh. There came Striking130 Jaguar, who struck them. They smashed their bones and their tendons.131 Their bones were ground up. They were broken into pieces. Their faces wereground up132 because they proved to be incapable of understanding before the face oftheir mother and the face of their father, Heart of Sky, Huracan by name.133



http://www.ancient-mythology.com/mayan/huracan.php
	In the Mayan language, his name means "one legged". The word hurricane is derived from Huracan's name.



--------


https://ia802705.us.archive.org/0/items/pdfy-Uy_BZ_QGsaLiJ4Zs/The%20Dead%20Sea%20Scrolls%20%5BComplete%20English%20Translation%5D.pdf
	The second type, represented by the Genesis Apocryphon, sets out
to render the Bible story more intelligible and attractive by giving it
more  substance,  by  reconciling  conflicting  statements,  and  by
reinterpreting in the light of contemporary standards and beliefs any
passages which might seem to give offence. In a somewhat similar
manner, a Commentary on Genesis from Cave 4 (4Q252) attempts to
adjust the chronology of the Flood to the specific sectarian calendar of
the Qumran Community.

	The third type of commentary departs from the biblical text and,
relying on one or several passages, creates a new story. Among
others, the Admonition associated with the Flood (4Q370, 185), the
Words of Moses (1Q22), the New Jerusalem texts (4Q554-5, 5Q15,
etc.) and the Prayer of Nabonidus (4Q242), inspired by Genesis,
Deuteronomy, Ezekiel and Daniel respectively, come into this
category.


guys who wrote dead sea scrolls cared especially about flood story?

though if flood was at CRE1, this would be 10,000 years later and on the other side of the world


pg 605


	... [And] He crowned the mountains with pro[duce] and poured food on them, and he satisfied every soul with good fruit. ‘Whoever does my will, let him eat and be satisfied’, says [the Lo]rd. ‘And let them bless [my holy] name. But, behold, they have done what is wicked in my eyes,’ said the Lord. They rebelled (?) against God through their ac[tio]ns, and the Lord judged them according to all their ways, and according to the thoughts of the inclination of their [evil] hearts. And He thundered at them in [His] power, and all the foundations of the earth [tr]embled, [and the wa]ters burst forth from the abysses. All the windows of heaven opened, and all the abyss[es] overflowed [with] mighty waters. And the windows of heaven [emptied out] rain and He destroyed them by the Flood... Therefore everything [perished] on the dry land; and men, beasts, birds and winged creatures [died]. And the g[iant]s did not escape



dead sea scroll says waters burst from abysses, "overflowed with mighty waters." Windows of heaven open and emptied out rain. Also says "foundations of the earth trembled"


	... in 1Q19 fr. 1 the subject is the miserable state of mankind before the Flood; f


http://jewishchristianlit.com/Texts/StudTxts/4Q370.html
	 1 Because they felt guilt from their sin, they will ask [...] God will justify [...] and he will purify them of their sins [...] their evil from their knowledge [...] 5 They grow, but their days are like a shadow [...] and he will always be caring [...] God's marvels; remember the mira[cles of the Lord...] due to his fear and your awe of him your heart will celebrate because he is good[4] [...] those who support you. Do not disobey what [God] asks you to do... 



...


http://www.pelister.org/courses/topics/gilgamesh/gilgamesh2.pdf
	I WILL proclaim to the world the deeds of Gilgamesh. This was the man to whom all things were known; this was the king who knew the countries of the world. He was wise, lie saw mysteries and knew secret things, he brought us a tale  of  the  days before  the  flood.  He  went  on  a  long  journey,  was  weary,  worn-out  with  labour, returning he rested, he engraved on a stone the whole story.

	...'You know the city Shurrupak, it stands on the banks of Euphrates? That city grew old and the gods that were in it were old. There was Anu, lord of the firmament, their father, and warrior Enlil their counsellor, Ninurta the helper, and Ennugi watcher over canals; and with them also was Ea. In those days the world teemed, the people multiplied, the world bellowed like a wild bull, and the great god was aroused by the clamour. Enlil heard the clamour and he said to the gods in council, "The uproar of mankind is intolerable and sleep is no longer possible by reason of the babel." So the gods agreed to exterminate mankind. Enlil did this, but Ea because of his oath warned me in a dream. He whispered their words to my house of reeds, " Reed- house, reed-house! Wall, O wall, hearken reed-house, wall reflect; O man of Shurrupak, son of Ubara-Tutu; tear down your house and build a boat, abandon possessions and look for life, despise worldly goods and save your soul alive. Tear down your house, I say, and build a boat. These are the measurements of the barque as you shall build her: let her beam equal her length, let her deck be roofed like the vault that covers the abyss; then take up into the boat the seed of all living creatures."

	'When I had understood I said to my lord, “Behold, what you have commanded I will honour and perform, but how shall I answer the people, the city, the elders?" Then Ea opened his mouth and said to me, his servant, "Tell them this: I have learnt that Enlil is wrathful against me, I dare no longer walk in his land nor live in his city; I will go down to the Gulf to dwell with Ea my lord. But on you he will rain down abundance, rare fish and shy wild-fowl, a rich harvest-tide. in the evening the rider of the storm will bring you wheat in torrents."

	In the first light of dawn all my household gathered round me, the children brought pitch and the men whatever was necessary. On the fifth day I laid the keel and the ribs, then I made fast the planking. The ground-space was one acre, each side of the deck measured one hundred and twenty cubits, making a square. I built six decks below, seven in all, I divided them into nine sections with bulkheads between. I drove in wedges where needed, I saw to the punt-poles, and laid in supplies. The carriers brought oil in baskets, I poured pitch into the furnace and asphalt and oil; more oil was consumed in caulking, and more again the master of the boat took into his stores. I slaughtered bullocks for the people and every day I killed sheep. I gave the shipwrights wine to drink as though it were river water, raw wine and red wine and oil and white wine. There was feasting then as there is at the time of the New Year's festival; I myself anointed my head. On the seventh day the boat was complete.

	'Then was the launching full of difficulty; there was shifting of ballast above and below till two thirds was submerged. I loaded into her all that I had of gold and of living things, my family, my kin, the beast of the field both wild and tame, and all the craftsmen. I sent them on board, for the time that Shamash had ordained was already fulfilled when he said, "In the evening, when the rider of the storm sends down the destroying  rain,  enter  the  boat  and  batten  her  down."  The  time  was  fulfilled,  the evening came, the rider of the storm sent down the rain. I looked out at the weather and it was terrible, so I too boarded the boat and battened her down. All was now complete, the battening and the caulking; so I handed the tiller to Puzur-Amurri the steersman, with the navigation and the care of the whole boat.

	'With the first light of dawn a black cloud came from the horizon; it thundered within where Adad, lord of the  storm  was  riding.  In  front  over  hill  and  plain  Shullat  and Hanish, heralds of the storm, led on. Then the gods of the abyss rose up; Nergal pulled out the dams of the nether waters, Ninurta the war-lord threw down the dykes, and the seven judges of hell, the Annunaki, raised their torches, lighting the land with their livid flame.. A stupor of despair went up to heaven when the god of the storm turned daylight to darkness, when he smashed the land like a cup. One whole day the tempest raged, gathering fury as it went, it poured over the people like the tides of battle; a man could not see his brother nor the people be seen from heaven. Even the gods were terrified at the flood, they fled to the highest heaven, the firmament of Anu; they crouched against the walls, cowering  like  curs.  Then  Ishtar  the  sweet-voiced Queen of Heaven cried out like a woman in travail: "Alas the days of old are turned to dust because I commanded evil; why did I command this evil in the council of all the gods? I commanded wars to destroy the people, but are they not my people,  for  I brought them forth? Now like the spawn of fish they float in the ocean." The great gods of heaven and of hell wept, they covered their months.

	'For six days and six nights the winds blew, torrent and tempest and flood overwhelmed the world, tempest and flood raged together like warring hosts. When the seventh day dawned the storm from the south subsided, the sea grew calm, the flood was stilled; I looked at the face of the world and there was silence, all mankind was turned to clay. The surface of the sea stretched as flat as a roof-top; I opened a hatch and the light fell on my face. Then I bowed low, I sat down and I wept, the tears streamed down my face, for on every side was the waste of water. I looked for land in vain, but fourteen leagues distant there appeared a mountain, and there the boat grounded; on the mountain of Nisir the boat held fast, she held fast and did not budge. One day she held, and a second day on the mountain of Nisir she held fast and did not budge. A third day, and a fourth day she held fast on the mountain and did not budge; a fifth day and a sixth day she held fast on the mountain. When the seventh day dawned I loosed a dove and let her go. She flew away, but finding no resting- place she returned. Then I loosed a swallow, and she flew away but finding no resting-place she returned. I loosed a raven, she saw that the waters had retreated, she ate, she flew around, she cawed, and she did not come back. Then I threw everything open to the four winds, I made a sacrifice and poured out a libation on the mountain top. Seven and again seven cauldrons I set up on their stands, I heaped up wood and cane and cedar and myrtle. When the gods smelled the sweet savour, they gathered like flies over the sacrifice. Then, at last, Ishtar also came, she lifted her necklace with the jewels of heaven that once Anu had made to please her. "O you gods here present, by the lapis lazuli round my neck I shall remember these days as I remember the jewels of my throat; these last days I shall not forget. Let all the gods gather round the sacrifice, except Enlil. He shall not approach this offering, for without reflection he brought the flood; he consigned my people to destruction."

	'When Enlil had come, when he saw the boat, he was wrath and swelled with anger at the gods, the host of heaven, "Has any of these mortals escaped? Not one was to have survived the destruction." Then the god of the wells and canals Ninurta opened his mouth and said to the warrior Enlil, "Who is there of the gods that can devise without Ea? It is Ea alone who knows all things." Then Ea opened his mouth and spoke to warrior Enlil, "Wisest of gods, hero Enlil, how could you so senselessly bring down the flood?

	Lay upon the sinner his sin, Lay upon the transgressor his transgression, Punish him a little when he breaks loose, Do not drive him too hard or he perishes; Would that a lion had ravaged mankind Rather than the flood, Would that a wolf had ravaged mankind Rather than the flood, Would that famine had wasted the world Rather than the flood, Would that pestilence had wasted mankind Rather than the flood. 29

	It was not I that revealed the secret of the gods; the wise man learned it in a dream. Now take your counsel what shall be done with him."

	'Then Enlil went up into the boat, he took me by the hand and my wife and made us enter the boat and kneel down on either side, he standing between us. He touched our foreheads to bless us saying, "In time past Utnapishtim was a mortal man; henceforth he and his wife shall live in the distance at the mouth of the rivers." Thus it was that the gods took me and placed me here to live in the distance, at the mouth of the rivers.'




------


https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-story-of-Manu-in-Hindu-mythology
	Obliged with his humility, Vishnu told Satyavrata that he is the 'Manu' of this manavantra and exactly seven days later there will be a great deluge or  Pralay and everything will be swallowed by the mighty ocean waves.He must take the Saptarishis all the pair of species worth saving for he is responsible for the continuation of life after the end of this period.

	The demigods themselves will construct the ship to take all life with him and he must wait for him ast the exact same places after the specified period.

	Manu with all species including elephants, tigers, plants etc with his parter shraddha waited for the lord to appear.On the prescribed day when the waves as big as mountains burgeoned the sky, Vishnu appered in his Matasya avatar this time golden in colour and a horn on his head. 

	The boat was tied by Shesha Naga-Vasuki (the serpent),  to the horn on the head of Matsya and thus Lord's devotees were kept safe from the rising waves.

	During this period manu asked different questions from Vishnu and his conversation is recorded in the Hindu text - Matasyapuran. After the great rain ended Manu saw the land and began the task of settlement and continuation of life in the new manavantra or the present era. 



https://books.google.com/books?id=bU1OZhGq8qUC&pg=PA236&lpg=PA236&dq=Shraddhadeva+flood+myth+translation&source=bl&ots=wR2eR3iGc0&sig=BkbLiChcTGa6Jv-DEye6vF0nFrw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiMkPeuv-7aAhUoh-AKHfK1A2YQ6AEIigEwBw#v=onepage&q=Shraddhadeva%20flood%20myth%20translation&f=false
	Praise be to thee, O Vishnu, lord of the universe!' The lord replied,--'Excellent! Excellent! Thou hast discovered the truth, O sinless one! Know that in a short time this earth shall be submerged in water, and that this ship has been prepared by all of the gods for thy preservation. When, therefore, the deluge takes place, enter this ship, and take with thee all kinds of seeds, and of animals that are produced from heat, from eggs, or from the womb; and fasten it to this horn of mine. Thus shalt thou be preserved, and after the deluge has ceased, shalt thou become, on the renovation of the world, the progenitor of all beings; and thus shall a holy devotee, steadfast in ascetic practices, and completely ocnversant in the divine knowledge, become at the beginning of the Krita Yug the lord of a manwantara.



https://books.google.com/books?id=IMCxbOezDi4C&pg=PA360&lpg=PA360&dq=Shraddhadeva+Manu+deluge&source=bl&ots=E4K7N7bb94&sig=IEuOV4bwjD3P5hD-W8DFw2jyZBk&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjxzvnAwe7aAhUywFkKHY4uB-A4ChDoAQg2MAM#v=onepage&q=Shraddhadeva%20Manu%20deluge&f=false



------


https://www.pitt.edu/~dash/chinaflood.html
	The Miao have no written records, but they have many legends in verse, which they learn to repeat and sing. The Hei Miao (or Black Miao, so called from their dark chocolate-colored clothes) treasure poetical legends of the creation and of a deluge. These are composed in lines of five syllables, in stanzas of unequal length, one interrogative and one responsive. They are sung or recited by two persons or two groups at feasts and festivals, often by a group of youths and a group of maidens. The legend of the creation commences:

	    Who made heaven and earth?
	    Who made insects?
	    Who made men?
	    Made male and made female?
	    I who speak don't know. 

	    Heavenly King made heaven and earth,
	    Ziene made insects,
	    Ziene made men and demons,
	    Made male and made female.
	    How is it you don't know? 

	    How made heaven and earth?
	    How made insects?
	    How made men and demons?
	    Made male and made female?
	    I who speak don't know.

	    Heavenly King was intelligent,
	    Spat a lot of spittle into his hand,
	    Clapped his hands with a noise,
	    Produced heaven and earth,
	    Tall grass made insects,
	    Stories made men and demons,
	    Made men and demons,
	    Made male and made female.
	    How is it you don't know?

	The legend proceeds to state how and by whom the heavens were propped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its place.

	The legend of the flood tells of a great deluge. It commences:

	    Who came to the bad disposition,
	    To send fire and burn the hill?
	    Who came to the bad disposition,
	    To send water and destroy the earth?
	    I who sing don't know. 

	    Zie did. Zie was of bad disposition,
	    Zie sent fire and burned the hill;
	    Thunder did. Thunder was of bad disposition,
	    Thunder sent water and destroyed the earth.
	    Why don't you know?


	In this story of the flood only two persons were saved in a large bottle gourd used as a boat, and these were A-Zie and his sister. After the flood the brother wished his sister to become his wife, but she objected to this as not being proper. At length she proposed that one should take the upper and one the lower millstone, and going to opposite hills should set the stones rolling to the valley between. If these should be found in the valley properly adjusted on above the other, she would be his wife, but not if they came to rest apart.

	The young man, considering it unlikely that two stones thus rolled down from opposite hills would be found in the valley, one upon another, while pretending to accept the test suggested, secretly placed two other stones in the valley, one upon the other. The stones rolled from the hills were lost in the tall wild grass, and on descending into the valley, A-Zie called his sister to come and see the stones he had placed.

	She, however, was not satisfied, and suggested as another test that each should take a knife from a double sheath and, going again to the opposite hilltops, hurl them into the valley below. If both these knives were found in the sheath in the valley, she would marry him, but if the knives were found apart, they would live apart.

	Again the brother surreptitiously placed two knives in the sheath, and, the experiment ending as A-Zie wished, his sister became his wife. They had one child, a misshapen thing without arms or legs, which A-Zie in great anger killed and cut to pieces. He threw the pieces all over the hill, and next morning, on awakening, he found these pieces transformed into men and women. Thus the earth was re-peopled. 



http://www.jasoncolavito.com/blog/skeptics-tim-callahan-oversimplifies-chinese-flood-myths
	Far from Callahan’s assertion of but two flood myths, the Handbook of Chinese Mythology records 400 flood myths, which can be divided into four primary subtypes according to Chinese scholars who study the country’s myths. The second subtype is the one given above, in which the sibling pair escapes in a gourd from the wrath of the Thunder God, who kills all other humans. The first subtype, quite similarly, has a sibling pair escape in a stone vessel and repopulate the earth after all other people are destroyed through a world flood of unspecified cause because a goddess gives them a warning. According to Chinese scholars, this flood myth originated with the Han, the ethnic group comprising the majority of modern Chinese people. The third and fourth types, less relevant to our discussion, mix elements of the first two types with a story of the sole survivor obtaining a heavenly maiden to repopulate the earth.

	According to Chen Jianxian, a scholar of Chinese myths, all four subtypes diverged from a common ancestor and were adapted to meet the cultural and social needs of the communities and ethnic groups telling them.


http://hmongstudies.org/GYLeeHSJ8.pdf
	The version of the story from the Hmong in Vietnam, Laos and Thailand says that the next morning little huts sprang up where the pieces of meat fell.  With smoke coming out of them, each hut was occupied by a couple6.  The piece of flesh that landed in the goat house (tsev tshis) gave rise to the Lee (Lis) clan, the one that ended up in the garden (vaj) yielded the Vang (Vaj) clan, and so on (Johnson, 1992: 115-117). The fleshy pieces also turned into insects, birds, oxen, buffaloes and rodents (Livo and Cha, op.cit.:  43).   However, the version from the Guizhou Miao says that the scattered pieces of flesh “turned into many, many peoples, turned into myriads of persons” of different races like the Dong, the Lolo, Chinese, etc.. (Bender, op.cit.: 167).  The bones (tough and marrow-rich) turned into the Miao people, the meat (rich in nourishment) into Han Chinese, and the intestines (of lower quality) into other groups, although these were not named (Bender, p. 208, note 9).  It is interesting to note that this epic creation story puts different ethnic groups into a hierarchy based on which body parts they came from and according the elevati  n of the landscape where they live today.7


------


http://www.curioustaxonomy.net/home/floods.htm

there are a lot of flood myths...


	Innuit:

    An unusually high tide caused a global flood. Shellfish and such things in the mountains are evidence of it. [Gaster, p. 120]



Innuit new best


	...Central Eskimo:

	The ocean rose suddenly and continued rising until it covered even the tops of mountains. Ice drifted on the water, and when the flood subsided, ice was stranded to form ice-caps on the tops of mountains. The shells and bones of many shellfish, fish, seals, and whales were also left high above sea level, where they may be found today. Many people drowned, but many others were saved in their boats. [Frazer, pp. 327-328]


kinda like CRE1? supposed to involve ice-shelf collapse



-----


https://ia601409.us.archive.org/5/items/folkloreinoldte00frazgoog/folkloreinoldte00frazgoog.pdf

pg 272

	
	The Peruvian legends of a great flood are told more summarily by the Spanish historian Herrera as follows.
	"The ancient Indians reported, that many years before there were any Incas, at the time when the country was very populous, there happened a great flood, the sea breaking out beyond its bounds, so that the land was covered with water, and all the people perished. To this the Guancas, inhabiting the vale of Xauxa, and the natives of Chiquito in the province of Collao, ad, that some persons remained in the hollows and caves of the highest mountains, who again peopled the land. Other of the mountain people affirm, that all perished in the deluge, only six persons being saved on a float, from whom descended all the inhabitants of that country. That there had been some particular flood may be credited, because all the several provinces agree in it."


Both Herrera and Cieza de Leon interviewed Incas and figured they were referring to a particular flood. Any others?

Of those interviewed by Herrera, some said the survivors hid in caves while others affirm that everyone except 6 people on a float perished.

Sign of competing myths?


pg 274

	
	..."The Mexicans," says the Italian historian Clavigero, "with all other civilized nations, had a clear tradition, though somewhat corrupted by fable, of the creation of the world, of the universal deluge, of the confusion of tongues, and of the dispersion of the people; and had actually all these events represented in their pictures."


Clavigero says there's a pictoral representation of these myths somewhere


pg 288


	...The Acagchemem Indians, near St. Juan Capistano in California, "were not entirely destitute of knowledge of the universal deluge, but how, or from whence, they received the same I could never understand. Some of their songs refer to it; and they have a tradition that, at a time very remote, the sea began to swell and roll in upon the plains, and fill the valleys, until it had covered the mountains; and thus nearly all the human race and animals were destroyed, excepting a few, who had resorted to a very high mountain which the waters did not reach. But the songs give a more distinct relation of the same, and they "  state that the descendants of Captain Ouiot asked of Chinigchinich vengance upon their chief--that he appeared unto them, and said to those endowed with the power, 'Ye are the ones to achieve vengeance--ye who cause it to rain! Do this, and so inundate the earth, that every living being will be destroyed.' The rains commenced, the sea was troubled, and swelled in upon the earth, covering the plains, and rising until it had overspread the highest land, excepting a high mountain, where the fey had gone with the one who had caused it to rain, and thus every other animal was destroyed upon the face of the earth. These songs were supplications to Chinigchinich to drown their enemies. If their opponents heard them, they sang others in opposition, which in substance ran thus: 'We are not afraid, because Chinigchinich does not wish to, neither will he destroy the world by another inundation.' Withouth doubt this account has reference to the universal deluge, and the promise God made, that there should not be another."


cites to "Father Friar Geronimo Boscana, 'Chinigchinich, an Historical Account, etc., of the Acaghemem Nation"


Boscana did his research in early 19th century, well after contact was made with them by missionaries: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ger%C3%B3nimo_Boscana https://digitalcommons.csumb.edu/hornbeck_spa_2/4/ https://www.missionsjc.com/history-preservation/history/


why did Boscana say "how, or from whence, they recieved the same I could never understand"?


