
Cappon himself being suspicious, this passage interesting:

https://books.google.com/books?id=Y24qAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA242&lpg=PA242
	It was Dr. Philip, the Las Casas of South Africa, Pringle calls him, who first brought the condition of the Hottentot, as distinguished from that of the slave, clearly before his countrymen at home.

	...In the historical controversial part of his book he presents his case, just as Dr. Theal does his, without any real attempt to appreciate the needs, or difficulties, or justifications of the other side. But then we must remember he is not properly a historian or economist, calmly weighing both sides, but a missionary, advocating the cause of the black race.



"Las Casas of South America" not something to be proud of.  From Las Casas book "A Brief Account of the Destruction of the Indies":


	The Reverend Author of this Compendious Summary was Bartholomaeus de las Casas alias Casaus, a Pious and Religeous person

	...THE CRUELTIES OF THE Spaniards Committed in AMERICA.

	...Now this infinite multitude of Men are by the Creation of God innocently simple, altogether void of and averse to all manner of Craft, Subtlety and Malice, and most Obedient and Loyal Subjects to their Native Sovereigns; and behave themselves very patiently, sumissively and quietly towards the Spaniards, to whom they are subservient and subject; so that finally they live without the least thirst after revenge, laying aside all litigiousness, Commotion and hatred.

	This is a most tender and effeminate people...

	...The Spaniards first assaulted the innocent Sheep, so qualified by the Almighty, as is premention'd, like most cruel Tygers, Wolves and Lions hunger-starv'd, studying nothing, for the space of Forty Years, after their first landing, but the Massacre of these Wretches, whom they have so inhumanely and barbarously butcher'd

	...As to the firm land, we are certainly satisfied, and assur'd, that the Spaniards by their barbarous and execrable Actions have absolutely depopulated Ten Kingdoms, of greater extent than all Spain, together with the Kingdoms of Arragon and Portugal, that is to say, above One Thousand Miles, which now lye wast and desolate, and are absolutely ruined, when as formerly no other Country whatsoever was more populous. Nay we dare boldly affirm, that during the Forty Years space, wherein they exercised their sanguinary and detestable Tyranny in these Regions, above Twelve Millions (computing Men, Women, and Children) have undeservedly perished; nor do I conceive that I should deviate from the Truth by saying that above Fifty Millions in all paid their last Debt to Nature.

	...and ill-treated them, consuming and wasting their Food ...one individual Spaniard consumed more Victuals in one day, than would serve to maintain Three Families a Month, every one consisting of Ten Persons.

	...They snatcht young Babes from the Mothers Breasts, and then dasht out the brains of those innocents against the Rocks; others they cast into Rivers scoffing and jeering them, and call'd upon their Bodies when falling with derision, the true testimony of their Cruelty, to come to them, and inhumanely exposing others to their Merciless Swords, together with the Mothers that gave them Life.

	...the Humility and Patience of the Inhabitants (which made their approach to these Lands more facil and easie) did much promote the business: Whom they so despicably contemned, that they treated them (I speak of things which I was an Eye Witness of, without the least fallacy) not as Beasts, which I cordially wished they would, but as the most abject dung and filth of the Earth; and so sollicitous they were of their Life and Soul, that the above-mentioned number of People died without understanding the true Faith or Sacraments. And this also is as really true as the praecendent Narration (which the very Tyrants and cruel Murderers cannot deny without the stigma of a lye) that the Spaniards never received any injury from the Indians

	...I adde farther, that I really believe, and am satisfied by certain undeniable conjectures, that at the very juncture of time, when all these outrages were commited in this Isle, the Indians were not so much guilty of one single mortal sin of Commission against the Spaniards, that might deserve from any Man revenge or require satisfaction.

	...I desire therefore that the Readers who have or shall peruse these passages, would please seriously to consider whether or no, such Barbarous, Cruel and Inhumane Acts as these do not transcend and exceed all the impiety and tyrrany, which can enter into the thoughts or imagination of Man, and whether these Spaniards deserve not the name of Devils. For which of these two things is more eligible or desirable whether the Indians should be delivered up to the Devils themselves to be tormented or the Spaniards? That is still a question.

	...And indeed no Man durst openly and publickly do any injury to the Inhabitants; for there some Justice, (which is no where else in India) though very little is done and practiced; yet they are grievously opprest with intolerable Taxes. But I do really believe, and am fully perswaded that our Sovereign Lord Charles the Fifth, Emperour and King of Spain, our Lord and Prince, who begins to be sensible of the Wickedness and Treacheries, which have been, and still are committed against this Miserable Nation, and distressed Countries contrary to the Will and Pleasure of God, as well as His Majesties that he will in time, (for hitherto the Truth hath been concealed and kept from his Knowledge, with as great Craft, as Fraud and Malice)


writes a bunch of one-sided superlatives and exaggerations for a cause where all he had to do is write the facts, similar to Philips on south Africa and Stead on Boer (and maybe Hobshouse too, ended up being seen as "pro-Boer" similar to Stead getting rep for traitor on Boer secret-service money)

so he wrecked it with "messenger overwhelming the message" effect as seen with some fake news, McCarthy, Al-Gore in global warming activism, etc.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valladolid_debate
	The affair is considered one of the earliest examples of moral debates about colonialism, human rights of colonized peoples and international relations in history. In Spain, it served to establish Las Casas as the primary, though controversial defender of the Indians.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bartolom%C3%A9_de_las_Casas#Protector_of_the_Indians
	Las Casas himself was granted the official title of Protector of the Indians, and given a yearly salary of one hundred pesos. In this new office Las Casas was expected to serve as an advisor to the new governors with regard to Indian issues, to speak the case of the Indians in court and send reports back to Spain. 


Las Casas also went after Olid for Cortes and convinced Gonzalaz to kill Olido (which he got arrested for), tried to convince people Oviedo a liar, ran his colony of Indians poorly letting them get killed and forcing them to relocate, didn't have "change of heart" until other clergy started calling out atrocities in Cuba, advocated for African slave trade to replace dead cubans to gov, &c., &c.

Also comes off like rooting against nation of his readers in his story of death of Spanish Hero de la Cosa which includes improbable details on Ojeda and Pizarro's escape:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alonso_de_Ojeda
	An eyewitness account recorded by historian Bartolomé de las Casas notes, "The Spaniards worked an incredible slaughter on that village, they spared no one, women, children, babies or not. Then they robbed."


https://books.google.com/books?id=XDqFMqS9MxkC&pg=PA80&lpg=PA80
	Indian Freedom: The Cause of Bartolomé de Las Casas, 1484-1566

	...He then decided, on the strength of his victory, to go after the Indians who had fled, hot on their heels to a village four leagues away, Turbaco by name. The villagers were alerted by the news brought by those fleeing. They took off with their wives, chidlren, valuables, and hid in the hills for safety. When the Spaniards arrived in the morning, they found no one to kill or capture. The Spaniards were careless, they had no idea the Indians were intelligent beings and that violence tought them lessons, as did human nature. So, with utter disregard and blinded by their own greed and sinfulness, the Spaniards scattered each on his own through the hills looking for someone to rob. Once the Indians, through their scouts, recognized that the Spaniards had broken up, they came out of the hills and attacked with a shout that split the sky and with a volley of poisoned arrows that seemed to darken the day. And the Spaniards, caught in their carelessness-no one would ever dare attack them!--and in such a sudden charge, were fear stricken, they were like game encircled, they didn't know where to hide, where to run, they were stunned. If they ran one way, there were Indians ready for them; if they ran another, they were finished--those same poisoned arrows the Indians killed some of them with, they yanked from the dead bodies and used again to wound and kill other Spaniards who were still on their feet.

	Juan de la Cosa, with a few men he collected around him, barricaded the entrance to an enclosure where Hojeda and another few were making a stand. Hojeda was up and down on his knees behind his shield to block the arrows. He was short and with his lightness, quickness, he kept from getting struck. But the second he saw all of his people down dead, and Juan de la Cosa and the group with him nearly finished, he took off at high speed, trusting the great quickness he had--and it was amazing!--right through the Indians fleeing so fast he seemed to by flying. He got up into the thickest hills he could find and headed towards the sea, as best he could judge direction, and towards his ships.

	Juan de la Cosa holed up in a hut stripped of its covering--or he stripped it as best he could, he and some of his men. The Indians couldn't burn them to death with just the frame. He fought until the last of his companions was down and dead. He felt the poison from the many arrows that had nicked him begin to work, so he sank in despair. But he saw one of his own men still left near him, fighting manfully away, the Indian's hadn't touched him. He said to the man, "God has spared you till now, brother, so run for it, save yourself, tell Hojeda you left me dead." This man was the only one to escape, I think, plus Hojeda.


This is the story that ended up getting re-written as the official account over and over in history books and magazines (e.g. by Washington Irving) which unfortunately left out an explanation for how Pizarro escaped while de la Cosa and the rest of the men died

La Casa's performance at Valladolid debate important since King Charles was on and off about supporting Conquista while it was killing millions of people (should get better notes on it):


http://www.columbia.edu/~daviss/work/files/presentations/casshort/casshort_08.html

https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/3h6b2y/in_1542_bartolom%C3%A9_de_las_casas_wrote_a_short/

on impact of Short Account


http://www.history.ubc.ca/sites/default/files/courses/lectures/%5Brealname%5D/3b_las_casas_and_sepulveda_0.pdf

Charles wants to know if these reports of atrocities are true


https://history.sfsu.edu/sites/default/files/images/2001_Bonar%20Ludwig%20Hernandez.pdf

Have a debate on Aristotle instead


https://books.google.com/books?id=9LUTDQAAQBAJ&pg=PT218&dq=Charles+V+Valladolid&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjR9M6yhYnbAhXkguAKHVJ6CdYQ6AEILTAB#v=onepage&q=Valladolid&f=false

Charles wasn't there?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Short_Account_of_the_Destruction_of_the_Indies
	It was written for Charles I of Spain.[1] Las Casas appeals to the King's pathos throughout his account by describing Charles I[1] as a lover, cultivator and as a man of justice.[8]


"short account" related to Charles questions on atrocities?

don't think always lays it on as thick (compare to other las Casas works)


http://cas.loyno.edu/sites/chn.loyno.edu/files/Bartoleme%20de%20Las%20Casas_The%20Eternal%20Gaurdian%20of%20the%20Indians.pdf


Charles getting some letters saying bad shit going down:

http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Hern%C3%A1n_Cort%C3%A9s
	Cortés hoped to avoid the errors that had been made in the islands. His letters to Charles V are filled with warnings and pleas. He begged that only settlers be allowed in New Spain, not adventurers "intent on consuming the country's substance and then abandoning it." He asked for humble priests who would convert by pious example, not high prelates who would "dispose of the gifts of the Church and waste them in pomp and other vices." He recommended that lawyers be banned on the grounds that they encouraged contention in order to profit from the ensuing litigation. Most of all, he deplored the practice of repaying services to the crown with Indian slaves to work land grants, yet he had no other way of rewarding his own followers.

	Charles V was not interested. He obviously believed his insistence on the conversion of the natives, thus ensuring their Heavenly reward, was quite enough and considered enslavement a small price to pay for such favors. Nor did he accede to any other request. The troublesome Cortés was soon replaced with a governing committee which exiled him.


on other side, Miguele de Estete's letters to Charles sucked and Hernando rushed to spain to tell first story about it

http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Francisco_Pizarro#Return_to_Spain_and_interview_with_Charles_V_.28Capitulaci.C3.B3n_de_Toledo.2C_1529.29


what was going on in Charles' head at time of Valladolid inquiery?


1510s destruction of Cuba, some clergy call out and las Casas "change of hear"--opportunity for public, Charles to learn of atrocity

1530s Pizzaros and Miguele de Estete send Charles letters of smashing time crushing heathen barbarians

around this time also Cortez letters of warning, Charles snubs Cortez

1542 Las Casas writes Short Account, New Laws passed

1550-51 Valladolid inquiry

https://history.sfsu.edu/sites/default/files/images/2001_Bonar%20Ludwig%20Hernandez.pdf

says debate raging on whether on not to do conqusita, Charles decides in 1550 to suspend and call Valladolid, ends up las Casas vs Sepulveda



https://books.google.com/books?id=lQQZoviOw7cC&q=Charles#v=onepage&q=Indians&f=false

Vitoria also big on Aristotle and theory

pg 246 "the conclusion of all this"

	...The Conclusion of all this is that the barbarians are not impeded from being true masters, publicly and privately, either by moral sin in general or by the particular sin of unbelief. Nor can Christians use either of these arguments to support their title to dispossess the barbarians of their goods and lands, as Cajetan elegantly deduces

	...The Conclusion of all that has been said is that the barbarians undoubtedly possessed as true dominion, both public and private, as any Christians. That is to say, they could not be robbed of their property


meanwhile:

http://www.columbia.edu/acis/ets/CCREAD/lascasas.htm
	Apologetic History of the Indies
	Bartolomé de Las Casas

	...CHAPTER CXXVII. THE INDIANS POSSESSED MORE ENLIGHTENMENT AND NATURAL KNOWLEDGE OF GOD THAN THE GREEKS AND ROMANS 


Vitoria investigated morality of colonization and concluded it is bad

he used theological argument against church justification for conquista which probably pissed off pro-conquista clergy

he was like counterpart to Las Casas, maybe would have been at head of movement against killing Americans if not for Las Casas


https://www.britannica.com/biography/Francisco-de-Vitoria
	Vitoria was doubtful of the justice of the Spanish conquest of the New World. As a friar, he refused to agree that war might be made on people simply because they were pagans or because they refused conversion—for belief was an act of the will and could not be forced. Nor could pagans be punished for offenses against God, because Christians committed just as many such offenses as pagans. The pope had no right to give European rulers dominion over primitive peoples; the most he could do was to allocate spheres for missionary work. Pagans had a right to their property and to their own rulers; they were not irrational. One could not speak of discovery as if the lands had been previously uninhabited; thus the only possible justification for conquest might be the protection of the innocent from cannibalism and human sacrifice. If a Christian ruler presumed to rule over a colony, it was his duty to give it benefits equal to those of the home country and to send efficient ministers to see just laws observed. The Indians were as much subjects of the king of Spain “as any man in Sevilla.”

	...Vitoria’s arguments, involving the application of moral principles, led to his being often consulted by the emperor Charles V. In 1530 the empress wrote to ask him about the divorce of King Henry VIII of England, and this led him to give a course of lectures on matrimony. In 1539 the emperor himself wrote to inquire about the possibility of sending 12 “learned and pious friars” to Mexico to found a university, and a second time to ask for some of Vitoria’s pupils. Vitoria’s open criticism did not affect Charles’s friendly attitude; in 1541 he wrote to Vitoria twice on the subject of the Indians. In 1545 Prince Philip (later Philip II of Spain) wrote in his father’s behalf to invite Vitoria to the Council of T
	rent. Vitoria declined, saying he was “more likely to go to the other world.” He died in the following year at age 60.


Charles respected Vitoria and would often consult him. Wrote to him twice on subject of the Indians


http://www.hetwebsite.net/het/profiles/vitoria.htm
	Francisco de Vitoria is widely regarded as the founder of the Salamanca School., particularly its marriage of "natural law" philosophy with Catholic doctrine.  Although he published nothing in his lifetime, his 1527-40 lectures (Relectiones) were assiduously recorded by his students. His De Indis lecture was an eloquent defense of Indian rights against enslavement.  Vitoria's thesis was highly influential and led the proclamation of the Leyes Nuevas by Charles V in 1542, which placed the indians directly under the protection of Spanish crown.  He also reviews the arguments raised by the Spanish conquistadors to justify their conquests in the Americas.  He systematically knocks down each and every defense used by the Spanish conquistadors - right of prior discovery, spreading the faith, expansion of empire, divine providence, etc.  Vitoria did come up with a justification for the Spanish empire, but one much diluted, stressing consent and voluntary adhesion by  the natives. 


Vitoria influence led to New Laws in 1542 and he knocked down conquistadors arguments


http://nativeamericannetroots.net/diary/1014
	The discovery of the Americas presented some difficult problems for the Christian Europeans: the people who lived in the Americas, often called Indians, did not appear in either their sacred books nor in the writings of the Greek historians. Initially, there was a great debate over whether or not American Indians were human. In order to be considered human, from a Christian European perspective, the Indians had to have the ability to reason and a soul which could be saved from eternal damnation through conversion to Christianity. Once the Pope had declared that Indians were human, the Spanish, unlike some of the other European powers, took seriously the humanity of native people. They saw them as a part of the community of God. They recognized that they had certain rights. During the 16th century the Spanish engaged in a number of intellectual debates about the Indians which culminated in the 1550-1551 debate in Valladolid.  

	Before Valladolid:  

	In 1532, Spanish judge Francisco de Vitoria declared that non-Christians were able to own property and therefore Indians may have title to their land. He also wrote:

	    “The Spaniards have the right to go to the lands of the Indians, dwell there and carry on trade, so long as they do no harm, and they cannot be prevented by the Indians from doing so.”

	Also in 1532, Francisco de Vitoria gave a series of lectures in Spain on “Indians Recently Discovered” in which he pointed out that Indians had reason, law, and their own governments. Indian land rights, according to de Vitoria, cannot be ignored.


would have been a lot better than las Casas


	Viewing Indians as human did not mean that the Spanish would stop enslaving them or allowing them to occupy lower levels of Spanish Christian society. In 1537, Pope Paul III, in a papal bull Sublimis Deus, declared that Indians were not to be enslaved nor were they

    “to be deprived of their liberty or the possession of their property, even though they be outside of the faith of Jesus Christ.”

	The Spanish King, however, disagreed with the bull and confiscated all copies of the bull before it could reach the Americas. He then prevailed upon the Pope to revoke the bull. 


what was going on here? papal bull were pope says Satan and journalists are attacking south america: http://www.papalencyclicals.net/paul03/p3subli.htm

then wikipedia says Charles liked it and it supported him: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sublimis_Deus

Charles also said to have had beef with Pope Paul III

why did he stop copies from going to Americas?


http://explorehumanrights.coe.int/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/Holy-See_ehr.pdf
	The Dominicans had procured from the Council of the Indies, established in 1524, a prohibition against making new slaves but, under pr essure from the colonists, its implementation was delayed until 1534. A controver sy arose between the Franciscan Zumarraga, Bishop of Mexico, who was against slaver y, and the Dominican Betanzos, who placed the humanity of the Indians in doubt. A t that point Pope Paul III, paying no heed to Charles V and to the latter’s displeasure, intervened with the Bull "Veritas Ipsa" (2 June 1537) which condemned the enslavement of the I ndians and affirmed their right, precisely as human beings, to freedom and property.


context was debate over slavery in Indies


has summary of Valladolid:

https://digitalcommons.law.lsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1006&context=jcls
	The doctrine of de Vitoria regarding just wars was applied against Native Americans by Ginés de Sepúlveda. He tried to make clear that Native Americans could not, because of their sins, under any circumstance, wage a just war against Spaniards.


At Valladolid Sepulveda cited Vitoria!


	After Ginés de Sepúlveda spoke, de las Casas began to speak, and took five days 164 to read entirely his Apología ( In Defense of the Indians ) 165 which comprised 90 quad demy 


leading up to Valladolid, Las Casas and Sepulveda were fighting, Las Casas stopped his book from being published but he got it published in Rome

at Valladolid Las Casas read his Apologia

nobody (apparently) tried to answer Charles question about atrocities being true...

	... His Apología represented a voluminous ency clopedia of all his ideas, scattered throughout his prev ious books and monographs. 169 While doing so, de las Casas desc ribed the cruelty of conquerors and highlighted his firsthand expe rience (something that Ginés de Sepúlveda did not have). 


Las Casas brought up his first-hand experience with cruelty of Conquistadores


	...De las Casas also mentioned the legal doctrines of de Vitoria. He claimed that de Vitoria ha d been misled, due to false information and wicked lies, to believe that Native Americans had committed the alleged crimes; therefore, there was no just title for Spaniards to start a war against them. 191


both las Casas and Sepelvula acting like Vitoria pro-killing Americans?


	...The Controversy had neither immediate winners nor losers. No official records were kept of the debates of the Junta , or they have not yet come to light. 199 Historians currently work with what Bartolomé de las Casas and Juan Gines de Sepúlveda wrote after the debate


no record kept of debate...



http://www.gutenberg.org/files/23466/23466-h/23466-h.html
	Las Casas occupied five sessions in reading his Historia Apologetica, after which the assembly directed the Emperor's confessor, Fray Domingo de Soto, to prepare a summary of the arguments of both parties, of which fourteen copies should be made for distribution to the members of the conference.


https://books.google.com/books?id=t-ux8_ElZLoC&pg=PA120&lpg=PA120
	The mention of Apologetica historia in the context of the Valladolid debate, however, requires some comment, since the possible influence of the debate and of Sepulveda's writings on its composition has been the subject of lengthy disagreement.

	The tone, the method and the very length of the Apologetica historia make it clear that the work was intended for a larger audience than the judges at Valladolid. It also seems evident, on internal evidence, that, as the Mexican scholar Edmundo O'Gorman has argued, the bulk of the text was completed after 1551 and could therefore have played no direct part in the sessions at Valladolid. In argumentium apologiae, however, Las Casas refers at several points, as both Angel Losada and Lewis Hanke have observed, to a 'second part' of his defence of the Indians which had been composed in the vernacular and which contained all the necessary empircal evidence to confound Sepulveda.

	On the basis of internal evidence collected by O'Gorman and the scrupulous avoidance of any reference to Sepulveda or the Valladolid debates, it seems likely that the text of the Apologetica histora was indeed written after 1551 and that it was an attempt to present Las Casas's arguments to a wider audience unfamiliar with the terms of their author's strugle with Sepulveda. There may well have existed an earlier versions which was more directly allied to Las Casa's efforts to demonstrate on empirical grounds the falsehoods of Sepulveda's claims that the Indians were 'barbarians.' But if so this has not survived.

	What has been ignored is the fact that the solve surviving manuscript of Argumentum is clearly *not* the deposition presented by Las Casas at Vallodolid. There are sufficeint similarties between this text and Domingo de Soto's summary to make it plain taht the former is a version of the later; but it is also clear from the introductory letter by Bartolome de la Vega that the text of the Argumentum apologiae we have today has been rewritten for publication.


historical debate over what happened at debate

	
	...In Las Casa's work the reading of Aristotle and Thomas, wildly inaccurate though it sometimes is


http://www.columbia.edu/acis/ets/CCREAD/lascasas.htm
	CHAPTER CCLXV. OTHER MEANINGS WHICH THE NAME "BARBARIAN" MAY HAVE 

	In certain places above we have referred to this term or word "barbarian," which many call and consider these Indian peoples and other nations to be. Sometimes in the Holy Scriptures and frequently in holy decrees and lay histories barbarians are named and referred to, especially since the Philosopher [Aristotle] makes particular mention in his Politics of barbarians. Many times I find the term wrongly used, owing to error or to confusion between some barbarians and others. In order therefore to avoid this error and confusion I wish to explain here what it is to be a barbarian and what nations can properly be called barbarian. For such a clarification one must make the following fourfold distinction. A nation or people or part thereof can be called barbarian for four reasons: first, considering the term broadly and improperly, for any strangeness, ferocity, disorder, exorbitance, degeneration of reason, of justice and of good customs and human benignity; or also for evincing opinion which is confused or flighty, furious, tumultuous or beyond reason. Thus, there are men who have deserted and forgotten the rules and order of reason and the gentleness and peacefulness which man should naturally possess; blind with passion, they change in some way, or are ferocious, harsh, severe, cruel, and are precipitated into acts so inhuman that fierce and wild beasts of the mountains would not commit them. They seem to have been divested of the very nature of man, and the word "barbarian" thus signifies a strangeness and exorbitance or novelty which is in discord with the nature and common reason of men....

	The second manner or species of barbarian is somewhat more limited; it includes those who lack a written language corresponding to their spoken one

	...The third species and manner of barbarians, interpreting the term or word most strictly and properly, comprises those who by their strange, harsh and evil customs, or by their evil and perverse inclination, turn out cruel and ferocious and, unlike other men, are not governed by reason. They are, on the contrary, stupid and foppish, and do not possess or administer law, justice or communities. Nor do they cultivate friendship or conversation with other men, for which they have no villages, townships or cities since they do not live in a society. Thus they do not possess or tolerate masters, laws, ordinances or a political regime. Nor do they maintain the communication necessary to mankind, such as buying, selling, trading, renting, directing and having gatherings among neighbors. They do not use deposits, loans and other contracts which are a part of the law of peoples, treated by the laws of the Digest and institute and by the doctors. For the most part they live scattered through the wilderness, fleeing human contact, contenting themselves with only the company of their women, in the fashion of such animals as monkeys, wildcats and other nongregarious beasts. Such as these are, and are called, simpliciter, strictly and properly, barbarians. The inhabitants of the province called Barbary must have been like this, bereft of everything essential to the state of man, such as human reason and all these common and natural things which most men follow and use. Particular mention is made of them in the Politics, Book 1, Chaps. II and V, where it says that they are slaves by nature and worthy of always serving and being the subjects of others, because among them there is no natural dynasty, for they have no ordered government, nobility or subjects.... In this regard Aristotle says: "One who is not a citizen of any State, if the cause of his isolation be natural and not accidental, is either a superhuman being or low in the scale of civilization. The clanless, lawless, hearthless man so bitterly described by Homer is a case in point; for he is naturally a citizen of no state and a lover of war."

	Such inclinations arise from many causes. Sometimes it is from the region in which they live and a type of sky which is unfavorable to them and intemperate; men who are born and live under these conditions are short of intelligence and show perverse inclinations toward the aforementioned evils.... The Philosopher adds in Chap. V that wise men can hunt or track them like animals in order to bring them under control and make use of them, causing the one who rules them to use his good judgment in attending to their welfare and keeping them from doing harm to others. In this way they can serve and profit their wise regent with their physical strength, because nature has made them robust for any work and chores which they might be ordered to do. Therefore to be simpliciter, properly and exactly, a barbarian is, as the Philosopher here concludes, to be a slave by nature.... 


http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/politics.1.one.html
	Politics

	By Aristotle

	Part V

	But is there any one thus intended by nature to be a slave, and for whom such a condition is expedient and right, or rather is not all slavery a violation of nature?

	There is no difficulty in answering this question, on grounds both of reason and of fact. For that some should rule and others be ruled is a thing not only necessary, but expedient; from the hour of their birth, some are marked out for subjection, others for rule.

	And there are many kinds both of rulers and subjects (and that rule is the better which is exercised over better subjects- for example, to rule over men is better than to rule over wild beasts; for the work is better which is executed by better workmen, and where one man rules and another is ruled, they may be said to have a work); for in all things which form a composite whole and which are made up of parts, whether continuous or discrete, a distinction between the ruling and the subject element comes to fight. Such a duality exists in living creatures, but not in them only; it originates in the constitution of the universe; even in things which have no life there is a ruling principle, as in a musical mode. But we are wandering from the subject. We will therefore restrict ourselves to the living creature, which, in the first place, consists of soul and body: and of these two, the one is by nature the ruler, and the other the subject. But then we must look for the intentions of nature in things which retain their nature, and not in things which are corrupted. And therefore we must study the man who is in the most perfect state both of body and soul, for in him we shall see the true relation of the two; although in bad or corrupted natures the body will often appear to rule over the soul, because they are in an evil and unnatural condition. At all events we may firstly observe in living creatures both a despotical and a constitutional rule; for the soul rules the body with a despotical rule, whereas the intellect rules the appetites with a constitutional and royal rule. And it is clear that the rule of the soul over the body, and of the mind and the rational element over the passionate, is natural and expedient; whereas the equality of the two or the rule of the inferior is always hurtful. The same holds good of animals in relation to men; for tame animals have a better nature than wild, and all tame animals are better off when they are ruled by man; for then they are preserved. Again, the male is by nature superior, and the female inferior; and the one rules, and the other is ruled; this principle, of necessity, extends to all mankind.

	Where then there is such a difference as that between soul and body, or between men and animals (as in the case of those whose business is to use their body, and who can do nothing better), the lower sort are by nature slaves, and it is better for them as for all inferiors that they should be under the rule of a master. For he who can be, and therefore is, another's and he who participates in rational principle enough to apprehend, but not to have, such a principle, is a slave by nature. Whereas the lower animals cannot even apprehend a principle; they obey their instincts. And indeed the use made of slaves and of tame animals is not very different; for both with their bodies minister to the needs of life. Nature would like to distinguish between the bodies of freemen and slaves, making the one strong for servile labor, the other upright, and although useless for such services, useful for political life in the arts both of war and peace. But the opposite often happens- that some have the souls and others have the bodies of freemen. And doubtless if men differed from one another in the mere forms of their bodies as much as the statues of the Gods do from men, all would acknowledge that the inferior class should be slaves of the superior. And if this is true of the body, how much more just that a similar distinction should exist in the soul? but the beauty of the body is seen, whereas the beauty of the soul is not seen. It is clear, then, that some men are by nature free, and others slaves, and that for these latter slavery is both expedient and right. 

	Part VI

	But that those who take the opposite view have in a certain way right on their side, may be easily seen. For the words slavery and slave are used in two senses. There is a slave or slavery by law as well as by nature. The law of which I speak is a sort of convention- the law by which whatever is taken in war is supposed to belong to the victors. But this right many jurists impeach, as they would an orator who brought forward an unconstitutional measure: they detest the notion that, because one man has the power of doing violence and is superior in brute strength, another shall be his slave and subject. Even among philosophers there is a difference of opinion. The origin of the dispute, and what makes the views invade each other's territory, is as follows: in some sense virtue, when furnished with means, has actually the greatest power of exercising force; and as superior power is only found where there is superior excellence of some kind, power seems to imply virtue, and the dispute to be simply one about justice (for it is due to one party identifying justice with goodwill while the other identifies it with the mere rule of the stronger). If these views are thus set out separately, the other views have no force or plausibility against the view that the superior in virtue ought to rule, or be master. Others, clinging, as they think, simply to a principle of justice (for law and custom are a sort of justice), assume that slavery in accordance with the custom of war is justified by law, but at the same moment they deny this. For what if the cause of the war be unjust? And again, no one would ever say he is a slave who is unworthy to be a slave. Were this the case, men of the highest rank would be slaves and the children of slaves if they or their parents chance to have been taken captive and sold. Wherefore Hellenes do not like to call Hellenes slaves, but confine the term to barbarians. Yet, in using this language, they really mean the natural slave of whom we spoke at first; for it must be admitted that some are slaves everywhere, others nowhere. The same principle applies to nobility. Hellenes regard themselves as noble everywhere, and not only in their own country, but they deem the barbarians noble only when at home, thereby implying that there are two sorts of nobility and freedom, the one absolute, the other relative. The Helen of Theodectes says:

	"Who would presume to call me servant who am on both sides sprung from the stem of the Gods? "

	What does this mean but that they distinguish freedom and slavery, noble and humble birth, by the two principles of good and evil? They think that as men and animals beget men and animals, so from good men a good man springs. But this is what nature, though she may intend it, cannot always accomplish.

	We see then that there is some foundation for this difference of opinion, and that all are not either slaves by nature or freemen by nature, and also that there is in some cases a marked distinction between the two classes, rendering it expedient and right for the one to be slaves and the others to be masters: the one practicing obedience, the others exercising the authority and lordship which nature intended them to have. The abuse of this authority is injurious to both; for the interests of part and whole, of body and soul, are the same, and the slave is a part of the master, a living but separated part of his bodily frame. Hence, where the relation of master and slave between them is natural they are friends and have a common interest, but where it rests merely on law and force the reverse is true. 


Las Casas argument based on defining the word "barbarian" then trying to argue native Americans are not barbarians.

Somehow Las Casas ends up twisting Aristotle's passage on trying to justify slavery to conclude a "barbarian" is exactly the familiar stereotype of native Americans: ferocious, stupid, lawless, lacking written language, living in the woods.

bit that says "Such inclinations arise from many causes. Sometimes it is from the region in which they live and a type of sky which is unfavorable to them and intemperate; men who are born and live under these conditions are short of intelligence and show perverse inclinations toward the aforementioned evils" an interesting conincidence given how that city probably ended up underwater


http://www.columbia.edu/acis/ets/CCREAD/lascasas.htm
	. . . These peoples of the Indies are not of the first category, because all in that one are accidental and not natural (we will not explain here what is natural, or nearly so), and such defects cannot by nature befall a whole nation; for it would be a great monstrosity of human lineage if nature were to err to the extent of making men of one nation furious and foppish, foolish or blind with passion. We have indicated above at various times that nature cannot, for the most part, make mistakes as far as man is concerned; these people can, however, fall into this type accidentally like any others by conducting affairs with comparable disorder. Similarly, these nations do not belong to the third type, as is clear, because they have their kingdoms and kings, armies, well- ruled and orderly states, houses, treasuries and homes; they live under laws, cedes and ordinances; in administering justice they prejudice no one. Hence they cannot belong to this type as they are completely the opposite. Nor do they belong to the second subgroup of the fourth type, for they have never harmed or done evil to the Church. They did not know or have word that the Church was in the world or what sort of people Christians were until we went seeking them. They had their lands, provinces, kingdoms and kings -- how distant from ours everyone knows -- each kingdom and province living among the others in peace. It follows, then, that all these peoples are barbarians in the broad sense, according to some quality; and the primary one is that they are unbelievers. This is only through their lack of our holy faith, which means a purely negative faithlessness, caused by mere ignorance, and is not a sin, as has been declared. Hence they belong, on these grounds, in the fourth category. They can also be included in the second one because of three qualities. One is that they are illiterate, or lack a written language as did the English. The second is that they are most humble peoples and obey their kings in a strange and admirable manner. The third is that they do not speak our language well nor understand us; but in this we are as barbarian to them as they to us. These, then, are the infinite peoples or nations that we call the western and southern Indies, which were populated for so many thousands of leagues and were discovered by that illustrious Don Christopher Columbus who first broke the isolation that had for so many thousands of years lain upon the Ocean Sea, of which he was most rightfully the first admiral. 


then he makes a weak argument full of superlatives that they probably don't fall into any of his types of "barbarian" and concludes their main problem is they are barbarians because they are unbelievers


based on Aristotle's rousing attempt at justifying slavery that apparently wasn't good enough so Las Casas puts words in his mouth to argue a barbarian is someone who lives in the woods and ends up defining "barbarian" as exactly the common stereotype of native Americans that Las Casas does so bad of a job arguing native Americans are not

with this Valladilod said to end up a debate over Aristotle and apparently nobody got to Charles question of "are these reports of atrocities true"


http://nativeamericannetroots.net/diary/1014
	Some of today’s scholars consider this to be one of the most important debates in history with regard to American Indians. 


could have done better for one of the most important debates in history...


parallels between attack on South America and South Africa deeper in this way, both involved killing by slavery and dehumanization and both had one or more "Las Casas" going out of their way to do a bad job to do the simple thing of making case to the public that these people are in fact human