
trying to get all the news articles on the underwater city:



May 14 2001:

https://web.archive.org/web/20010517055536/www.msnbc.com/news/573489.asp?cp1=1
	Looking for lost riches in Cuba’s seas

	Underwater surveyors say they may have found sunken city

	Reuters

	...“It’s a new frontier,” Soviet-born Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zelitsky enthused as she pored over video images of hitherto-unseen seafloor taken by underwater robots.

    “We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters,” said Zelitsky, president of Canada-based Advanced Digital Communications. “It’s so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan.”

    ...Most intriguingly, researchers using sonar equipment have discovered, at a depth of about 2,200 feet (700-800 meters), a huge land plateau with clear images of what appears to be urban development partly covered by sand. From above, the shapes resemble pyramids, roads and buildings.

    ...“It is stunning. What we see in our high-resolution sonar images are limitless, rolling, white sand plains and, in the middle of this beautiful white sand, there are clear manmade large-size architectural designs. It looks like when you fly over an urban development in a plane and you see highways, tunnels and buildings,” Zelitsky said.

    “We don’t know what it is, and we don’t have the videotaped evidence of this yet, but we do not believe that nature is capable of producing planned symmetrical architecture, unless it is a miracle,” she added in an interview at her office at Tarara, along the coast east of Havana.


similar article:

May 20 2001:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/273531201/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Scientists find possible undersea city off Cuba

	By Andrew Cawthorne
	Reuters

	..."It's a new frontier," enthused Soviet-born Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zeilitsky, from British Columbia-based Advanced Digital Communications, pouring over video images of hitherto unseen sea floor taken by underwater robots.

	"We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters. ...It's so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan," she said.

	Most intriguingly, researchers using sonar equipement have discovered, at a depth of about 2,200 feet, a huge land plateau with clear images of what appears to be urban development partly covered by sand.

	"It is stunning. What we see in our high-resolution sonar images are limitless, rolling, white sand plains and, in the middle of this beautiful white sand, there are clear manmade large-size architectural designs. It looks like when you fly over an urban development in a plane and you see highways, tunnels and buildings," Zelitsky said.



Similar reprinted 8 months later:

Dec 07 2001:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/364253488/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Explorers find stone structures off Cuba

	By Andrew Cawthorne
	Reuters

	...From above, the shapes resembled pyramids, roads and buildings, they said.

	"It's a really wonderful structure which looks like it could have been a large urban center," said Canadian ocean engineer Paulina Zelitsky, from British Columbia-based Advanced Digital Communications. "However, it would be totally irresponsible to say what it was before we have evidence."

	The explorers said that they discovered the structures last year at the depth of about 2,100 feet. They returned in July, along with experts fro the Cuban Academy of Sciencies, and sent a miniature robot to film parts of the 7.7-square-mile area.

	Those images confirmed the presence of huge, smooth, cut blocks in perpendicular and cirular formations, some in pyramid shapes, the researchers said. Most of the blocks, measuring between about 6.5 and 16 feet in length, were exposed, some stacked one on another, the researcher said.

	The discovery could provide evidence that Cuba was joined to mainland Latin America. Volcanic activity may explain how the site ended up under water.

	Researchers plan to return to the site in January




Dec 7 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/science/evidence-of-ancient-city-found-in-depths-off-cuba/article4157433/
	Evidence of ancient city found in depths off Cuba

	Michael Posner
	Published December 7, 2001
	Updated April 13, 2018

	...Using sophisticated sonar and videotape equipment, offshore engineer Paulina Zelitsky, her husband, Paul Weinzweig, and her son, Ernesto Tapanes, have found megaliths "of a kind you'd find at Stonehenge or Easter Island," Mr. Weinzweig said in an interview yesterday.

	"Some structures within the complex may be as long as 400 metres wide and as high as 40 metres," he said. "Some are sitting on top of each other. They show very distinct shapes and symmetrical designs of a non-natural kind. We've shown them to scientists in Cuba, the U.S. and elsewhere, and nobody has suggested they are natural."

	Moreover, an anthropologist affiliated with the Cuban Academy of Sciences has said that still photos taken from the videotape clearly show "symbols and inscriptions," Mr. Weinzweig said. It is not yet known in what language the inscriptions are written.

	The sonar images, he added, bear a remarkable resemblance to the pyramidal design of Mayan and Aztec temples in Mexico.

	Mr. Weinzweig said it is too early to draw firm conclusions from the evidence collected so far. he research team plans another foray to the site -- off the Guanahacabibes Peninsula on Cuba's western tip -- next month. Next summer, it hopes to return again, this time with the first deep-water mobile excavator, equipped with functions needed for on-site archeological evaluation, including the ability to blow sand off stone.

	Geologists have recently hypothesized that a land bridge once connected Cuba to Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. And portions of the Cuban island are believed to have been submerged in the sea on three separate occasions in the distant past.

	The structures are on a plateau that forms the bottom of what is thought to be a mud volcano, 650 to 700 metres beneath the surface of the ocean and along what is clearly a geological fault line. "It's well known that ancient civilizations liked to build at the base of volcanoes, because the land is fertile. So that's suggestive," Mr. Weinzweig said.

	One tantalizing possibility, entirely speculative for now, is that if the legendary sunken continent of Atlantis is ever proven to have existed, these structures may have been submerged during the same cataclysm.

	Mr. Weinzweig simply says that more information is needed. "We'd prefer to stay away from that subject. This is something of great potential scientific interest, but it must involve serious authorities on ancient civilizations."

	The precise age of the underwater site is also unknown, although Cuban archeologists in 1966 excavated a land-based megalithic structure on the western coast, close to the new underwater discovery, said to date from 4000 BC. "Based on that and other geological information, we're speculating that these are 6,000 years old," he explained.

	"It's not exact, but they're very ancient."

	If that dating estimate proves accurate, it would mean that an ancient civilization had designed and erected these vast stone structures in the Americas only 500 years after human settlements first became organized in cities and states.

	They would also have been built long before the wheel was invented in Sumeria (3500 BC), or the sundial in Egypt (3000 BC). The three pyramids on Egypt's Giza plateau are thought to have been constructed between 2900 and 2200 BC.

	...The team returned this past summer with a 1.3-tonne, unmanned Remotely Operated Vehicle, controlled from the mother ship via fibre-optic cable. Its cameras confirmed the earlier findings, showing vast granite-like blocks, between two and five metres in length, that were cut in perpendicular and circular designs.

	But because of technical problems, Mr. Weinzweig said, "we were only able to survey the perimeter of the site. Based on initial explorations, we think it's much larger than even our sonar projections show. It may extend for several kilometres."

	In addition to the archeological site, ADC has been exploring what Mr. Weinzweig calls "the richest underwater cemetery in the world" for sunken Spanish galleons. Hundreds of treasure-bearing ships are said to lie around the island, several hundred to several thousand metres deep.

	Last year, off Havana Bay, it found the remains of USS Maine, the battleship that blew up in 1898. That incident, never entirely explained, killed 260 sailors and precipitated the Spanish-American War.



similar article to above by Posner:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/195803753/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky

another similar by Posner:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/195803076/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky



Dec 7 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/canadians-spearhead-undersea-exploration/article25451381/base64/?
	Canadians spearhead undersea exploration

	Michael Posner

	From Friday's Globe and Mail

	Published Friday, Dec. 07, 2001 12:00AM EST

	Last updated Saturday, Mar. 21, 2009 11:49AM EDT

	The team that discovered the ancient structures under the sea near Cuba is led by offshore engineer Paulina Zelitsky, a naturalized Canadian who was born in Odessa.

	Her son, Ernesto Tapanes, is chief financial officer and operations director of their business while husband Paul Weinzweig handles the media and public affairs side.

	Mr. Weinzweig, the son of Toronto composer John Weinzweig and novelist Helen Weinzweig, is a former professor of sociology and philosophy at Trent University and the University of Toronto.

	Using their collective smarts, and in partnership with Fidel Castro's government, the trio head Advanced Digital Communications, a company that is exploring Cuban waters for treasures archeological and golden.

	Ms. Zelitsky, 56, and Mr. Weinzweig, 58, met in the mid-1980s in Ottawa. Ms. Zelitsky, who is fluent in three languages, had already had a distinguished career in marine engineering. She had worked in Cuba at a submarine base installation in the late 1960s and was, says her husband, "familiar with the history of Cuba as a historic centre of trade, bridging the old world and the new."

	"To do anything serious in another country," Mr. Weinzweig said, "you have to be there on the ground. You give it everything, or nothing."

	At one time, he said, the technology needed for underwater exploration was "exclusively in the hands of the military. . . . Now, it's available on the civilian market, though it is not cheap."

	To date, he says, ADC has invested several millions of dollars in the Cuban venture.


Dec 7 2001:

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/1697038.stm
	'Lost city' found beneath Cuban waters

	...They say they still do not understand the exact nature of their discovery, and plan to start a thorough analysis of the site - off the tip of the Guanahacabibes Peninsula - in January. 

	...The explorers first spotted the underwater city last year, when scanning equipment started to produce images of symmetrically organized stone structures reminiscent of an urban development. 

	...The images the robot brought back confirmed the presence of huge, smooth blocks with the appearance of cut granite.

	Some of the blocks were built in pyramid shapes, others were circular, researchers said.

	They believe these formations could have been built more than 6,000 years ago, a date which precedes the great pyramids of Egypt by 1,500 years.

	"It's a really wonderful structure which really looks like it could have been a large urban centre," ADC explorer Paulina Zelitsky told the Reuters news agency.

	"However, it would be totally irresponsible to say what it was before we have evidence." 



Dec 8 2001:

https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/science/sunken-city-made-by-nature-critics-say/article18419987/
	Sunken city made by nature, critics say

	Michael Posner
	Published December 8, 2001
	Updated April 13, 2018

	The discovery of what may be an ancient underwater city off Cuba's western coast is causing heated controversy in the world of marine archeologists.

	It was reported yesterday that a team of Canadian and Cuban researchers had taken sonar scans and videotape footage of mammoth stones submerged in 600 to 700 metres of water that seemed to be arrayed in architecturally designed formations.

	Paul Weinzweig, a member of the Havana-based Advanced Digital Communications, which is conducting the site exploration, said that some of the structures resemble Mayan temples.

	The megalithic stones, Mr. Weinzweig said, may date from as early as 4000 BC. His wife, project director Paulina Zelitsky, said the "structure looks like it could have been a large urban centre."

	But Martin Dean, director of the University of Britain's St. Andrews marine archeological unit, said yesterday that "the world's seas and oceans are full of underwater limestone formations. Some of them cover many square miles, which are mistakenly interpreted as sunken cities with monotonous regularity."

	Another critic, Alistair Crame, head of the Geological Sciences division of the British Antarctic Survey in Cambridge, claimed the site is too deep to have any structures fashioned by humans.

	"It's very unlikely that the seabed would drop 650 metres in 6,000 years," he said.

	...But Ms. Zelitsky, a Soviet-trained offshore engineer, rebuffed the criticism. "I'm here in Cuba and what we've found is here. It's local, not in the United Kingdom. And it's not a matter of opinion -- it's objective reality."

	She said the project team, which includes Mr. Weinzweig, her son Ernesto Tapanes and representatives of Cuba's Academy of Sciences, was initially "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature," and thought the megaliths might be limestone.

	Cuban geologists have recently said the stones are "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation. Geologists think they are granite."

	The project team plans to return to the site, off the Guanahacabibes Peninisula, next month to conduct more sonar scans and videotape with cameras mounted in an unmanned vehicle.




Dec 9 2001, more or less the same as Dec 7 Posner article with some paragraphs and wording different, some paragraphs not shared:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/155209949/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Submerged city may lie of the coast of Cuba

	By Pichael Posner

	Toronto Globe and Mail


quotes Weinzweig quoting "an anthropologist" saying the videotype shows "symbols and inscriptions"



May 28 2002:

https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2002/05/0528_020528_sunkencities.html
	New Underwater Finds Raise Questions About Flood Myths

	Brian Handwerk
	for National Geographic News
	May 28, 2002

	... Cuba's Sunken City

	Deep in the waters of Cabo de San Antonio, off Cuba's coast, researchers are exploring unusual formations of smooth blocks, crests, and geometric shapes. The Canadian exploration company that discovered the formations, Advanced Digital Communications, has suggested that they could be the buildings and monuments of an early, unknown American civilization.

	Many scientists are skeptical of any theory that might tempt people to draw a parallel with the fabled lost city of Atlantis. Geologist Manuel Iturralde, however, has stressed the need for an open mind while investigations of the site continue.

	"These are extremely peculiar structures, and they have captured our imagination," said Iturralde, who is director of research at Cuba's Natural History Museum. Iturralde has studied countless underwater formations over the years, but said, "If I had to explain this geologically, I would have a hard time."

	In his report on the formations, Iturralde noted that conclusive proof of man-made structures on the site could reinforce some oral traditions of the Maya and native Yucatecos. These people still retell ancient stories of an island inhabited by their ancestors that vanished beneath the waves.

	Iturralde makes it clear, however, that just because no natural explanation is immediately apparent, it doesn't rule one out. "Nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures," he said.

	Further research is scheduled to take place over the summer. Data thus far has been collected using sonar scans and video. The structures are buried under 1,900 to 2,500 feet (600 to 750 meters) of water.  


Jun 30 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/148821174/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Images send explorer on search for City

	Anita Snow AP

	HAVANA -- Floating aboard the Spanish trawler she chartered to explore the Cuban coast for shipwrecks, Paulina Zelitsky pores over the yellowed tomes filled with sketches and tales of lost cities -- just like the one she believes she has found deep off the coast of western Cuba.

	Zelitsky's eyes grow wide as she runs her small hand over water-stained drawings of Olmec temples in a dog-eared 1928 study of Mexican archaeology. The Russian Canadian explorer compares the shapes with green-tinted sonar images captured in March while studying the megalithic structures she discovered two years ago off Cuba's Guanahabibes Peninsula.

	Amid piles of sonar-enhanced maps is a well-worn copy of "Comentarios Reales de las Incas," or "Royal Commentaries of the Incas," a classif oc Spanish Renaissance narrative by the son of an Inca princess and a Spanish conquistador. Zelitsky is particularly fascinated by Garcilasco Inca de la Vega's account of ancient ruins at the bottom of Lake Titicaca, Peru.

	"You would not think that a reasonable woman of my age would fall for an idea like this," chucked Zelitsky, a 57-year-old offshore engineer who runs the exploration firm Advanced Digital Communications of British Columbia, Canada.

	Zelitsky passionately believes the megalithic structures her crew discovered 2,310 feet below the ocean's surface could prove that a civilization lived thousands of years ago on an island or stretch of land joining the archipelago of Cuba with Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, about 120 miles away.

	...The company is among five foreign firms working with Fidel Castro's government to explore the island's coast for shipwrecks of historical and commercial interest. But the mysterious shapes have become the focus of this crew's exploratory efforts.

	Puzzled by the shapes with clean lines, the team has repeatedly returned to the site -- most recently in March -- for more sonar readings, more videotapes of the megaliths with an unmanned submarine.

	Evidence for Zelitzky's hypothesis is far from conclusive, and has been met with skepticism from scientists from other countries who nevertheless decline to comment publicly on the project until scientific findings have been made available. Submerged urban ruins have never been found at so great a depth.

	Elsewhere in the Caribbean, the ruins of Jamaica's Port Royal are located at depths ranging from a few inches to 40 feet below the ocean surface. The once raucuous seaside community was controlled by English buccaneers before it slid under the waves in earthquakes beginning in 1692.

	Located at just 20 feet are the mysterious megalithic structures discovered in the 1960s and 1970s in the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini. Scientific expeditions there have produced inconclusive results about the shapes' origins.

	Back in Cuba, a leading scientist recently admitted there is no easy explanation for the megalithic shapes found by Zelitsky's crew. The shapes on the sonar maps look like walls, rectangles, pyramids--rather like a town viewed from the window of an airplane flying overhead.

	"We are left with the very questions that prompted this expedition," geologist Manuel A. Iturralde Vincent, research director of Cuba's National Museum of Natural History wrote March 13.

	...In his written comments, later delivered at a scholarly conference here, Iturralde concluded it was possible the structures were once at sea level, as Zelitsky theorizes.

	Because of the large faults and an underwater volcano nearby, Zelitsky supposes that the structures sank because of a dramatic volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago.

	Providing some support for that argument, Iturralde confirmed indications of "significantly strong seismic activity."

	Zelitsky shies from using the term "Atlantis," but comparisons are inevitable to the legendary sunken civilization that Plato describedin his "Dialogues" around 3600 B. B.

	There have been untold, unsuccessful attempts over the ages to find that lost kingdom. One common theory is that Atlantis was located on the Aegean island of Thera, which was destroyed by a volcanic eruption nearly 3,600 years ago.

	Zelitsky does, however, mention known archaeological monuments when discussing her find.

	Perhaps, Zelitsky mused, the megaliths off Cuba are remains of a trading post, or a city built by colonizers from Mesoamerica. Those civilizations were far more advanced than the hunters and gatherers the Spaniards found upon arriving here five centuries ago.

	Zelitsky admitted much more investigation is needed to solve the mystery.

	But that doesn't keep her from believing, or from smiling slyly as she opens her agenda for 2002 to the first page.

	Written there are the words Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei uttered under his breath at the height of the Inquisition, right after abjuring his belief that the Earth revolved around the sun. "E pur si muove," it reads -- "Nevertheless, it does move."


has account of Zelitsky studying ancient American architecture, accounts of Incas

this one also says structures were "2,310 feet below the ocean's surface"

also mentions "mysterious megalithic structures" discovered 20 feet below surface in 60's and 70's in "the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini."

Says Zelitsky theorizes the structures she found were sunk by a volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago, and Iturralde "confirmed indications of 'significantly strong seismic activity.'"

last paragraph of article unusual



Oct 10 2002:

https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/2002/10/10/in-cuban-depths-atlantis-or-anomaly/96b5cd79-9eb8-4fc7-8f18-8a3b3e9b4037/
	In Cuban Depths, Atlantis or Anomaly? - The Washington Post

	By Kevin Sullivan October 10, 2002

	The images appear slowly on the video screen, like ghosts from the ocean floor. The videotape, made by an unmanned submarine, shows massive stones in oddly symmetrical square and pyramid shapes in the deep-sea darkness.

	Sonar images taken from a research ship 2,000 feet above are even more puzzling. They show that the smooth, white stones are laid out in a geometric pattern. The images look like fragments of a city, in a place where nothing man-made should exist, spanning nearly eight square miles of a deep-ocean plain off Cuba's western tip.

	"What we have here is a mystery," said Paul Weinzweig, of Advanced Digital Communications (ADC), a Canadian company that is mapping the ocean bottom of Cuba's territorial waters under contract with the government of President Fidel Castro.

	"Nature couldn't have built anything so symmetrical," Weinzweig said, running his finger over sonar printouts aboard his ship, tied up at a wharf in Havana harbor. "This isn't natural, but we don't know what it is."

	...Manuel Iturralde, one of Cuba's leading geologists, said it was too soon to know what the images prove. He has examined the evidence and concluded that, "It's strange, it's weird; we've never seen something like this before, and we don't have an explanation for it."

	Iturralde said volcanic rocks recovered at the site strongly suggest that the undersea plain was once above water, despite its extreme depth. He said the existence of those rocks was difficult to explain, especially because there are no volcanoes in Cuba.

	He also said that if the symmetrical stones are determined to be the ruins of buildings, it could have taken 50,000 years or more for tectonic shifting to carry them so deep into the ocean. The ancient Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt is only about 5,000 years old, which means the Cuba site "wouldn't fit with what we know about human architectural evolution," he said.

	...But Iturralde stressed that the evidence is inconclusive. He said that no first-hand exploration in a mini-submarine had been conducted, which would provide a much more comprehensive assessment. He said a remote-operated video camera provides only a limited perspective, like someone looking at a close-up image of an elephant's toe and trying to describe the whole animal.

	...Earl has visited Cuba and described the preliminary evidence as "fantastic" and "extraordinary." But she stressed that as a "skeptical scientist," she would assume that the unusual stones were formed naturally until scientific evidence proved otherwise.

	"There is so much speculation about ancient civilizations," she said. "I'm in tune with the reality and the science, not the myths or stories or fantasies."


more suggestive title on same in this newspaper: https://www.newspapers.com/image/268977189/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky


Oct 20 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/284583128/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Underwater Pattern suggests a city

	Vanessa Bauza

	...Suddenly her eyes caught a calendar by her desk featuring Mayan ruins. Something clicked. Could the massive structures Zelitsky and her husband, Paul Weinzweig, stumbled upon while hunting for sunken treasure really be remnants of an ancient city?

	"The structures we found on the side scan sonar simply are not explicable from a geological point of view," Weinzweig said. "There is too much organization, too much symmetry, too much repetition of form."

	...But they're stumped by the strange formations across an 8-square-mile area off Cuba's western tip. At her home in eastern Havana, Russian-born Zelitsky traced the sonar image with a pen to outline what she was could be an urban settlement with corridors and buildings. Videotape from a remotely operated, couch-sized mini-submarine deployed last summer shows cube and pyramid shapes behind a thin veil of silt and plankton.

	Experts on both sides of the Florida Straits agree the formations are highly unusual, but say there is not enough evidence to conclude they are manmade. A research expedition planned for July had to be canceled because ACD didn't get the Cuban government's permission to import additional equipment, including a manned submersible, Zelitsky said.

	Cuban geologist Manuel Iturralde of Havana's National Meseum of Natural History has analyzed the video, sonar images and rock samples from the site. While he's never seen anything like the repetative patterns, Iturralde wants to see more samples before making any conclusions.

	"We have some figures which are extremely unusual," Iturralde said. "But nature is much richer than we think."

	The depths at which the structures were found pose problems for an Atlantis-type hypothesis, he added. At the maximum velocity of Earth's tectonic movements it would have taken 50,000 years for the ruins to sink 2,000 feet underwater. However, "50,000 years ago there wasn't the architectural capacity in any of the cultures we know of to build complex buildings," Itturralde said.

	Michael Faught, assistant professor of anthropology at Florida State University and a specialist in underwater archaeology agreed.

	"It would be cool if they [Zelitsky and Weinzweig] were right," he said. "But it would be real advanced thing we would see in the New World for that time frame. The structures are out of time and out of place."

	Researchers at the National Geographic Society, whose planned trip to Cuba this summer fizzled due to bad weather and permit problems, say they hope to travel here next year.

	"The formation of the Earth took such violent turns at times, it could be many, many things. You will always have people contending that, for example, the pyramids were built by aliens," said John Echave, senior editor at National Geographic magazine, who came to Havana last fall and studied the sonar and video images.

	"We're at a point where we would very much like to solve this riddle."


appears to be Spanish version of same: https://www.newspapers.com/image/269349734/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky


says Cuban government didn't give permission to send more equipment, manned submersable



Nov 17 2002:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141361/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Underwater world: man's doing or nature's?

	By David Ballingrud

	Paulina Zelitsky remembers the hot July day two summers ago and the sudden, unpleasant feeling that she had stumbled into a place she was not supposed to be.

	...As Zelitsky and her husband, Paul Weinzweig, watched the screen, the empty plain of sea bed suddenly gave way to images of massive geometric shapes, apparently cut from stone. As more shapes come into view, some appeared to be arranged in patterns over a large area about 20-kilometers square.

	Some stone appeared to be cut into blocks, and some blocks seemed perfectly aligned. They appeared to form corridors and the outlines of rooms, the two scientists said. There were round stones and pyramid-shaped ones, too.

	The sea botton in that area is an undulating sand plain, Zelitsky said. What they were seeing should not have been there.

	"We were shocked, and frankly we were a little frightened," said Zelitsky. "I was as though we should not be seeing what we were seeing. Our first thought was maybe we found some kind of secret military installation."

	Finding a military installation on the bottom of the sea might unnerve anybody, and for the 


https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141599/
	next six months the two researchers stayed busy with their work for the Cuban government and said little about their discovery. "But I tried to identify what we had seen," Zelitsky said. "Then one day, in our office, I looked up and saw pictures of ancient Mexican ruins on a calendar, and I made a mental connection."

	...believe they might have found the remnants of a lost civilization perhaps 6,000 years old.

	This site, perhaps built by a culture that far pre-dates the famous Maya of the Yucatan Peninsula, might have been the victim of a vast, mysterious cataclysim that somehow dropped it 2,000 feet beneath the surface of the sea.

	"Nothing is known for certain now," Weinzweig said, "but oral tradition in early Mexico speaks of an advanced civlization of tall white people who came from the East, and of an island that sank in a great natural disaster." In the ancient language of some early Central American Indians, he said, "the word Atlanticu means 'our good father,' or, 'the place where our good father rests.'"

	Then again, maybe not.

	Maybe the intriguing shapes found by the sonar are just that -- intriguing shapes, carved over the centuries by whimsical Mother Nature.

	Zelitsky and Weinzweig don't think so, though, and plan to visit the site again with a manned submersible equipped with camears and powerful lights -- when they have the money.

	Others have interest in such a project, but haven't committed to it.

	"They are interesting anomalies, but that's just as much as anyone can say right now," said John Echave, senior editor of National Geographic Magazine, who traveled to Cuba to study the sonar images.

	"But I'm no expert on sonar," he said, "and until we are able to actually go down there and see, it will be difficult to characterize them."

	Echave pointed out that hard-to-explain undersea geologic formations have cropped up elsewhere in the world, too, in places such as Japan and nearby in the Bahamas.

	In the Bahamas, pilots and divers wondered for years about the so-called "Atlantis Road," a long row of seemingly connected stone blocks in about 15 feet of water. Gene Shinn of the St. Petersburg office of the U.S. Geological Survey became fascinated by the story and investigated in 1978. His conclusion: The blocks are natural, caused by a combination of sea level rise and erosion.

	Nevertheless, Echave said, "we are talking to Advanced Digital and we have an interest in their project. We have to get the protocols in motion, but at this point we have not dotted the i's and crossed the t's." Echave said since any project undertaken would be scientific, he did not expect problems with the Cuban or U.S. governments.

	Dr. Robert Ballard is explorer-in-residence for the National Geographic Society and is founder and president of the Institute for Exploration at Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Conn. He is best known, however, for the 1985 dicovery of the passenger liner Titanic deep in the North Atlantic.

	Ballard said he has heard of the formations in the Yucatan Channel but is not convinced they are the work of humans.

	"That's too deep," he said of the 2,000-foot site. "I'd be surprised if it was human. You have to ask yourself, how did it get there?

	"I've looked at a lot of sonar images in my life," Ballard said, "and it can be sort of like looking at an ink blot--people can sometimes see what they want to see. I'll just wait for a bit more data."

	...They sent down a Remotely Operated Vehicle to examine and videotape the structures. Images sent back by the ROV confirmed the presence of large blocks of stone -- about 8 feet by 10 feet -- some circular, some rectangular, some in the shape of pyramids. Some blocks appeared deliberately stacked atop one another, others appeared isolated from the rest.

	"Large structures in the middle of a desert," Zelitsky called them. Because of their white appearance underwater, Zelitsky said the structures appear to be granite--a good building stone but one foreign to that part of the world.

	"There is no granite in Cuba or the Yucatan," Zelitsky said. "That area features limestone." Granite is found in Central Mexico, however, and was used by ancient people such as the Maya and an older civilization, the Olmec, in their construction of cities and buildings.

	The second visit to the underwater site proved only marginally revealing, however. Currents in the area are strong, Weinzweig said, and heavy sediment in the water made videotaping difficult.

	"We've done about as much as we can do with the technology we have," Weinzweig said. "The next step will be to go down there with a manned submersible, so we can move from place to place without a tether holding us back."

	...A land bridge from Mexico to Cuba?

	...In his book Gateway to Atlantis, Andrew Collins speculated that Caribbean might turn out to be the site of Atlantis and proposed that it might have been destroyed by a comet impact that devestated the eastern coastline with mammoth tsunamis or tidal waves.
	
	Zelitsky and Weinzweig dismiss the Atlantis talk.

	The story is a myth, said Zelitsky, a Russian-trained engineer. "What we have found is more likely remnants of a local culture," once located on a 100-mile "land bridge" that joined Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula with Cuba.

	This local culture, however, might be every bit as remarkable as Atlantis.

	The Maya, for example, developed a magnificent civilization on the Yucatan Peninsula beginning about A.D. 250 and peaking about A.D. 900. Spain finally completed its conquest of the Maya about 1500.

	...But Zelitsky thinks the Mega site pre-dates even the ancient Maya--by a lot.

	Recently excavated sculptures by the Olmec and Totonec peoples, also of the Yucatan and Central America, are about 4,500 to 6,000 years old, she said.

	"The Mayan nation came to the Yucatan at much later times and learned the arts and sciences of civilization from earlier nations." We know little of these nations, she said, "thanks to the Spanish church, who burned all their archives."

	Today Mexico and Cuba are separated only by the 100-mile width of the Yucatan Channel, and geologists have speculated for years that a "land bridge" once joined the two. According to this theory, underwater faults eventually parted and destroyed the bridge, swalloing the land above. But 2,000 feet? If the megaliths are indeed ruins, how did they get so deep?

	Zelitsky answers that large-scale underground movement of Earth's tectonic plates is usually accompanied by volcanoes and earthquakes.

	"It's a very powerful event," she said, and the sinking of an island "could have happened very quickly." While some megaliths on the sea bottom appear organized, she said, others do not. "Over about 20 square kilometers there are a large number of structures that appear jumbled, disorganized," she said.

	Cuban geologist Iturralde, she said, "has clearly identified on the ocean bottom the coastal structures of a separated island." Also, she said, the sea bottom at the site is covered with volcanic glass "which could be generated only on the oxygenated surface."

	Everyone should keep an open mind, said geologist Iturralde.

	"These are extremely peculiar structures, and they have captured our imagination," he said. "If I had to explain this geologically, I would have a hard time."

	But, he added, just because no natural explanation is immediately apparent, it doesn't mean there isn't one. "Nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures," he said.

	He also raised a third possibility. The megaliths might be natrual structures, he said, "but transformed or adapted by intelligent beings for dwelling or religious purposes."

	What next? For now, nothing

	...In finding the Maine and the Mega site, Advanced Digital has made use of two major improvements in underwater exploration. One is side-scan sonar ...and the other is satellite-based Global Positioning System, or GPS.

	...For now, though, Weinzweig and Zelitsky say they have their hands full keeping up with the terms of the contract with the Cuban government.

	..."For now we are busy with our other work," Zelitsky said. "As soon as we have done enough to help finance an archaeological expedition (to the Mega site) then maybe we can do that. But right now it's oil and gas."



has quote by Zelitsky saying she at first wondered if it were a secret military installation

has picture of initial sonar scan

https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141599/

has map of discovery site, puts it a bit northwest of western tip of cuba

has quote by Zeilitsky saying looks like made of granite which would be far away from where it was built

author goes on to try to tie discovery to Atlantis

author points out Olmec and Totonec statues were dated 4,500 to 6,000 years old, quotes Zeilitsky saying she thinks civ of sunken city was older than Maya

says geologists have speculated a "land bridge" joined the Yucatan and Cuba and was destroyed by underwater faults

Zeilitsky says some of the structures appear organized, some don't

quote Zeilitsky saying they are bound by contract with Cuban government, financing, "for now we are busy with other work"



------




May 14 2001 Andrew Cawthorne article:

Zelitsky crew first to survey bottom of Cuban waters < 50 meters

also looking at influence of currents on climate, volcanoes, history of the formation of the Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks

Zelitsky says city possibly "populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan."

discovered at depth of 700-800 meters

Zelitsky says its "stunning," have "high-resolution sonar images" of "clear manmade large-size architectural designs" and looks like when you fly over a city in a plane.

Zelitsky says if this were made by nature it would have to be a miracle

article is about Zelitsky's Cuba exploration mission in general



May 20 2001 article reprinted same quotes and made it about the city discovery



Dec 07 2001 Andrew Cawthorne article, "Explorers find stone structures off Cuba", almost same as May 20 article, added that they had sent down a ROV in July which confirmed "huge, smooth cut blocks" in formations, some stacked on each other.

Added that could provide evidence that Cuba was joined to mainland, volcanic activity could explain how it got underwater, and the researchers planned to return in January.



Dec 7 2001 article by Micheal Posner, "Evidence of ancient city found in depths off Cuba":

Interviews Weinzweig, who says they found megaliths "of a kind you'd find at Stonehenge or Easter Island" and that they showed them to many scientists and that "nobody has suggested they are natural." Weinzweig tells Posner an anthropologist said still photos clearly show "symbols and inscriptions," and adds that the sonar images are similar to Mayan and Aztec temples.

The site is located off the Guanahacabibes Peninsula

According to Weinzweig, they plan to return next summer with "the first deep-water mobile excavator"

Posner writes geologists hypothesize a Cuba land bridge, portions of Cuba are believed to have sank "on three separate occasions" in the past, and the structures are thought to be at base of a mud volcano and on a fault line.

quote Weinzweig "It's well known that ancient civilizations liked to build at the base of volcanoes, because the land is fertile. So that's suggestive"

Posner points out that if city as old as 6k years, would be built 500 years after humans first organized in cities and thousands of years before invention of the wheel.

Quotes Weinzweig saying they brought back an ROV, but "were only able to survey the permiter of the site" because of technical problems.

Posner closes with pointing out the crew also exploring "the richest underwater cemetery in the world" for sunken ships, and that they found the Maine, whose sinking caused a war.



Dec 7 2001 artilce by Michael Posner, "Canadians spearhead undersea exploration":

team led by Zelitsky, who was distinguised Soviet maritine engineer working at Cuban submarine installation in the late 60's

Her son is CFO of their business

Husband Weinzweig is the son of a composoer and a novelist and was a professor of sociology and philosophy

quote Weinzweig that (at time of wroking at sub base?) Zelitsky was "familiar with the history of Cuba as a historic centre of trade, bridging the old world and the new."

quote Weinzweig saying once the technology for underwater exploration was "exclusively in the hands of the military", but now it's available for civilians but expensive

Posner closes pointing out Zelitsky's company had invested several million dollars in their Cuban exploration



Dec 7 2001 article by BBC, "'Lost city' found beneath Cuban waters":

Short article, recounts Zelitsky crew discover structures on sonar, sent ROV and saw stone structures "reminiscent of an urban development," still not sure.

As earlier articles, says they believe were built 6,000 years ago

ends with "However, it would be totally irresponsible to say what it was before we have evidence." 



December 8 2001 article by Micael Posner, "Sunken city made by nature, critics say":

refers to report on 7th, statements of team and that they brought back video footage of "mammoth stones" that "seemed to be arrayed in architecturally designed formations."

goes over some critics of theory that formations man-made

names Martin Dean, who says ocean full of limestone formations which are regularly mistaken for sunken cities

then Alistair Crame, who said it is unlikely the seabed would drop 650 meters in 6,000 years

quotes Zelitsky "rebuffing the criticism," saying what they found is not a matter of opinion, its objective reality. She says the team was initially suspicious of it's man-made nature and thought the megaliths were limestone. Posner adds that Cuban geologists recently said they think the stones are granite.

Posner ends saying team plans to return next month with more sonar scans and video equipment.



May 28 article by Brian Handwerk, "New Underwater Finds Raise Questions About Flood Myths":

opens up with short overview of tales of massive floods and that scholars argue real sea-level rise affected Stone Age hunters, and recent findings might offer clues.

Then goes over sunken Cuban city in a few paragraphs, quotes Iturralde saying would "have a hard time" explaining it geologically, but "nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures"

Says "further research is scheduled to take place over the summer."

Rest of the article on the Indian temples discovered under the ocean, "very exciting" and made from "locally available granite." Closes that could lend credence to tales disregarded as legend.



June 30 2002 article by Anita Snow, "Images send explorer on search for City":

Opens up with Zelinsky doing archeology things. She is studying drawings of Olmec tmples, a study of Mexican archaeology, and "Royal Commentaries of the Incas." Says she is particularly fascinated by Garscilasco Inca de la Vega's account of ancient ruins at the bottom of lake Titicaca. Says she passionately believes the structures she found could prove a civilization lived thousands of years ago on an island or a land bridge from Yucatan to Cuba.

Says working with Fidel's government to explore shipwrecks, but ruins have become focus of the crew's efforts. Repeatedly revisted site most recently in March.

Says evidence is far from conclusive and has been met with skepticism from scientists from other countries who "nevertheless decline to comment publicly" until scientific findings become available. "Submerged urban ruins have never been found at so great a depth."

Then mentions Port Royal and structures 20 feet under sound between North and South Bimini in Bahamas in 60's and 70's.

Says Iturralde "recently admitted" there's no easy explanation. Quotes him saying "we are left with the very questions that prompted this expedition," then that he wrote it was possible the structures were once at sea level like Zeilinsky theorizes.

Says Zelinsky thinks the structures sank from a volcano or seismological event, supported by Iturralde confirming indications of "significantly strong seismic activity."

Goes over "inevitable" comparison to Atlantis thing like other articles and adds that a common theory is that Atlantis was on island of Thera which was destroyed by a volcanic eruption.

Snow ends article with paragraph about quote from Galileo during inquisition--"nevertheless, it does move."



Oct 10 2002 article by Kevin Sullivan, "In Cuban Depths, Atlantis or Anomaly?":

Recaps crew got sonar images and videotype, describes stones "in geometric pattern" and "look like fragments of a city"

quotes Weinzweig "what we have here is a mystery" and "nature couldn't have built anything so symmetrical"

says they are on a treasure-hunting mission from Fidel and also looking for oil and gas

account of how they made discovery, "then, by sheer serendipity ... the unexpected rock formations appeared on the sonar readouts." Says this startled them and quotes Weinzweig "we have loked at enormous amounts of ocean bottom, and we have never seen anything like this." Follows with "the discovery immediately sparked speculation about Atlantis." "Weinzweig and Zeltisky were careful not to use the A word" and said more study was needed before conclusions.

Then goes over speculation of Atlantis-hunters on the internet who long argued Atlantis was off coast of Cuba, Crete, Gibraltar or elsewhere, and "several Web sites have touted the ADC images as a possible first sighting."

Interviews George Erikson, Atlantis hunter who wrote a book speculating it would be found in tropical Americas. Erikson says he "always disagreed with all the archaeologists who dismiss myth" and hopes with Cuban site "to be the first to say, 'I told you so.'"

Then quotes Iturralde saying it was too soon to know what the images prove, concluded its weird and we don't have an explanation. Recounts Iturralde saying volcanic rocks suggest plain was once above water despite extreme depth and no volcanoes being in Cuba. Says would take 50,000 years to sink and quotes Iturralde saying the site "wouldn't fit with what we know about human architectural evolution."

Says Iturralde "stressed that the evidence is inconclusive" and ROV only gives limited view like looking up-close at an elephant's toe to describe the whole elephant.

Quotes Nat Geo Syliva Earl saying it's intriguing and that a planned expedition last summer was canceled due to funding problems, but hope to explore next summer.

Says Earl described the preliminary evidence as "fantastic" and "extraordinary" but stressed that she would assume the "unusual stones were formed naturally until scientific evidence proved otherwise." Quotes "There is so much speculation about ancient civilizations" and "I'm in tune with the reality and the science, not the myths or stories or fantasies."

Suillivan says as they "search for answers" the team "suddenly became involved in a new mystery" and started looking into a potentially lucrative shipwreck. They declined to name the ship fearful of other treasure hunters and can keep 40% of the value of whatever they recover.

ends quoting Weinzweig "one thing is legend ... another is the hard evidence you find on the ocean floor" then ends saying sonar images of "the unusually shaped stones" have fueled speculation that the lost city of Atlantis may have been found.



Oct 20 2002 article by Vanessa Bauza, "Underwater Pattern suggests a city":


Bauza says Zelitsky spent months studying grainy sonar images trying to find a scientific explanation for the fantastic geometric patterns she found underwater

Suddenly she say a calendar with Mayan ruins and it clicked, could this be remnants of an ancient city?

quotes Weinzweig "not explicable from a geological point of view ...There is too much organization, too much symmetry, too much repetition of form."

Says in treasure-hunting they found 20 shipwrecks, the USS Maine and vast oil fields, but stumped by "strange formations". She traced the sonar image of what she thinks could be an urban settlement with corridors and buildings. ROV video shows cubes and pyramid shapes behind a veil of silt and plankton. Experts agree the formations are unusual, but say there's not enough evidence to conclude they are manmade.

Says Zeiltsky said a research expedition was planned for July but had to be canceled because the Cuban governt wouldn't give permission for additional equipment and a manned submersible.

Quotes Iturralde saying he's analyzed the video, sonar, and rock samples. Has never seen anything like "the repetitive patterns" but wants to see more samples before making any conclusions. "We have some figures which are extremely unusual ... But nature is much richer than we think."

Added depth is a problem, would take 50,000 years to sink, and quotes him "50,000 years ago there wasn't the architectural capacity in any of the cultures we know of to build complex buildings."

Quotes Michael Faught agreeing, "would be cool" but would be advanced for anything seen in the New World for that time frame.

Bauza says Nat Geo's planned summer trip fizzled due to "bad weather and permit problems" but hope to go next year.

Ends with quote by Nat Geo's John Echave, who saw the video and sonar images, "The formation of the Earth took such violent turns at times, it could be many, many things. You will always have people contending that, for example, the pyramids were built by aliens." "We're at a point where we would very much like to solve this riddle."



Nov 17 2002 article by David Ballingrud, "Underwater world: man's doing or nature's?":

Opens with story of Zelitsky, remembers when she "stumbled into a place she was not supposed to be."

recounts they wre watching a screen with "massive geometric shapes" where "some appeared to be arranged in patterns over a large area about 20-kilometers square." Says appeared to be cut into blocks, and some seemed perfectly aligned. "They appeared to form corridors and the outlines of rooms, the two scientists said. There were round stones and pyramid-shaped ones, too."

"What they were seeing should not have been there."

quotes Zelitsky saying she was shocked and a little frightened, "as though we should not be seeing what we were seeing."

quotes that her first thought was that they found some kind of secret military installation.

Ballingrud points out that for the next 6 months they stayed busy with Cuban gov work and said little about their discovery. Follows with Zelitsky quote that one day she saw a picture of Mexican ruins on a calendar and made a mental connection.

goes on they believe might be 6k years old, might be victin of "vast, mysterious cataclysim that somehow dropped it 2,00 feet beneath the surface of the sea" and quotes Weinzweig talking about "oral tradition" in early Mexico and that in an ancient Central American language "the world Atlanticu means 'our good father'"

Ballingrud follows "Then again, maybe not." Says maybe "intriguing shapes ... are just that, intriguing shapes, cared over the centuries by whimsical Mother Nature."

Says Zelitsky and Weinzweig don't think so and plan to visit again, others have interest but aren't committed to it. Quotes Nat Geo John Echave "interesting anomalies, but that's just as much as anyone can say right now." "Until we are able to actually go down there and see, it will be difficult to characterize them."

follows with story of "Atlantis Road," long row of stone blocks which were thought to be man-made but turned out to be natural.

then "Nevertheless" quotes Echae saying he talked to ADC and are interested in their project. Recounts him saying since any project would be scientific, he did not expect problems with Cuban or U.S. governments.

quotes Ballard, who discovered Titanic, saying he heard of the formations but isn't convinced. Quotes him "That's too deep ...have to ask yourself, how did it get there?" quotes him saying "I've looked at a lot of sonar images in my life ...and it can be sort of like looking at in ink blot--people can sometimes see what they want to see." (article has picture of one of the sonar images attached)

later says sent ROV, and saw images of blocks of stone "some circular, some rectangular, some in the shape of pyramids".

Quotes Zelitsky saying the blocks appear to be granite, foreign to that part of the world but used by May and older civ Olmec in construction of cities and buildings.

Ballingrud says second visit "proved only marginally revealing," recounts Weinzweig said heavy sediment made videotaping difficult.

Ballngrud goves over Atlantis myth and Andrew Collins who wrote a book speculating it might be in Caribbean.

Quotes Zelitsky saying she thinks its remnants of a local culture once on a land bridge between the Yucatan and Cuba. Says Zelitsky thinks the site pre-dates the Maya by a lot and she said recently excavated Olmec at Totonec scultures were 4,500-6,000 years old.

Quotes Zelitsky saying Maya came to Yucatan at much later times than them and leanred arts and sciencies of civilization from earlier nations. Know little of them "thanks to the Spanish church, who burned all their archives."

Ballingrud wonders how the structures got so deep, quotes Zelitsky saying tectonic activity associated with volcanoes and earthquakes, sinking of an island "could have happened very quickly," some of the structures appear jumbled and disorganized.

Quotes Zelinsky saying Iturralde identified the coastal structures of a separated island on the ocean bottom and found volcanic glass which can only be generated on the oxygenated surface.

Then quotes Iturralde should keep an open mind, would have a hard time explaining geologically, but "nature is able to create some really unimaginable structures." Iturralde also speculated could be natural structures "transformed or adapted by intelligent beings for dwelling or religious purposes."

Ballingrud says team used two new technologies to find site, side-scan sonar and GPS.

Ends saying what next? for now nothing, busy with work for Cuban government. Quotes Zelinsky can do more if they get financing, "but right now it's oil and gas."







------


https://books.google.com/books?id=q9MonwEACAAJ&dq=paulina+zelitsky&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj4jMjj8vLaAhVlg-AKHbQ2DrEQ6AEIKTAA



-------

https://www.csicop.org/si/show/geologists_adventures_with_bimini_beachrock/author/eugeneashinn

Atlantis conspiracy theorists I guess a big deal to geologists


http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.585.4297&rep=rep1&type=pdf

but this archeoogist is also watching the archeologists


https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=de&u=http://atlantisforschung.de/index.php%3Ftitle%3DDouglas_G._Richards&prev=search

https://www.amazon.com/Mysteries-Atlantis-Revisited-Cayces-wisdom/dp/0062501410
	
	Mysteries of Atlantis Revisited (Edgar Cayce's wisdom for the new age) Paperback – November 1, 1988
	by Edgar Evans Cayce (Author), Gail Cayce Schwartzer (Author), Douglas G. Richards (Author) 


looks like he's a crackpot


------


In aggregate:

Zelitsky, her husbund Weinzweig, and her son founded company ADC. ADC is one of five companies doing research work for the Cuban government to find lucrative shipwrecks and oil and gas.

Zelitsky was a distinguished Soviet marine engineer who worked at a Cuban sub base in the late 60's. Weinzweig was a professor of sociology and philosophy, and their son is CFO of their business.

Before discovering the site, ADC in their contract discovered the shipwreck of the USS Maine, the sinking of which was a causus belli for the Spanish-American war.

Their contract with Cuba involves recovering shipwrecks, and they get 40% of whatever they recover. Funding became a problem for their Cuba venture, which was founded by ADC itself and some "private investors" (who?).

Brining up treasure would finance the project, but Zelitsky said their agenda was "much broader" and that she was anxious about global environment changes. By May 2001, Zelinsky said their efforts had yielded knowledge on the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of the formation of the Caribbean Islands, and numerous historic wrecks.

ADC was the first to survey the bottom of Cuban waters below 50 meters. Before, only the military had this capability, but by then the technology was commercially available. Their search was aided by GPS and side-scan sonar, two new technologies for the time.

The team discovered the site, located northwest of the Guanahacabibes Peninsula, in July of 2000 from "high resolution" sonar images. According to Zelitsky, the images showed "clear man-made large-size architectural designs" in the midst of a plain of white sand, similar to flying over an urban development in a plane and seeing highways and buildings below. The site was a 20 square kilometer area 700-800 meters below sea level. Zelitsky says they were startled by the discovery and their first thought was that it was some kind of military installation. Zelitsky said the team were at first "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature." Zelitsky "tried to identify what we had seen" and one day made the mental connection with ruins after seeing a picture of ancient Mexican ruins on a calendar.

They said little of the discovery for six months. By May of 2001, the team thought they had possibly discovered a sunken city. Zelitsky (others?) theorized it was populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture.

In July of 2001, the team returned with the Cuban Academy of Sciences and sent an ROV to take video images of the site. The images showed huge, smooth cut blocks with the appearance of granite. Most of the blocks were exposed and measured between 2 to 5 meters in length. Some of the blocks were cut in a perpendicular shape, others in a circular shape, and others a pyramid shape. Some of the blocks were stacked on one another.

Weinzweig told Michael Posner the images showed structures "400 meters wide and as high as 40 meters." Weinzweig said an anthropologist at the Cuban Academy of Sciences said some of the images show "symbols and inscriptions." Weinzweig said the team could only explore the perimeter of the site due to technical difficulties, but the team planned to return the summer 2002 with additional equipment, including a manned submersible and possibly an underwater excavator.

It would become a pressing question as to how the structures got to the bottom of the ocean, among the team and scholars alike. At the natural velocity of tectonic movements, it would take 50,000 years for land to sink 700-800 meters below sea level. Geologists had speculated in recent years that a land bridge once connected Cuba to the Yucatan peninsula, until underwater faults eventually destroyed the bridge. Because the site was located on a fault line at the base of an underwater volcano, Zelitsky supposed the site was sunk by a volcanic or seismological event thousands of years ago. She said that over about 20 square kilometers, some of the megaliths appear organized and others do not.

At one point, rock samples were recovered from the site (when and by who?). Geologist Manuel Iturralde, who had analyzed these samples, said the ocean bottom near the site is covered with volcanic glass "which could be generated only on the oxygenated surface." According to Zelinsky, Iturralde had "clearly identified" structures of a separated island at the site. At a later scholarly conference in Cuba, Iturralde concluded it was possible the structures were once at sea level, and Iturralde confirmed indications of "significantly strong seismological activity."

The question of who might have built the structures was of interest to the researchers and commentators in the press.




	“We are the first people ever to see the bottom of Cuban waters over 50 meters,” said Zelitsky, president of Canada-based Advanced Digital Communications. “It’s so exciting. We are discovering the influence of currents on global climate, volcanoes, the history of formation of Caribbean islands, numerous historic wrecks and even possibly a sunken city built in the pre-classic period and populated by an advanced civilization similar to the early Teotihuacan culture of Yucatan.”



	Zelitsky's eyes grow wide as she runs her small hand over water-stained drawings of Olmec temples in a dog-eared 1928 study of Mexican archaeology. The Russian Canadian explorer compares the shapes with green-tinted sonar images captured in March while studying the megalithic structures she discovered two years ago off Cuba's Guanahabibes Peninsula.




	The sonar images, he added, bear a remarkable resemblance to the pyramidal design of Mayan and Aztec temples in Mexico.



	In his report on the formations, Iturralde noted that conclusive proof of man-made structures on the site could reinforce some oral traditions of the Maya and native Yucatecos. These people still retell ancient stories of an island inhabited by their ancestors that vanished beneath the waves.



	"Nothing is known for certain now," Weinzweig said, "but oral tradition in early Mexico speaks of an advanced civlization of tall white people who came from the East, and of an island that sank in a great natural disaster." In the ancient language of some early Central American Indians, he said, "the word Atlanticu means 'our good father,' or, 'the place where our good father rests.'"





	...But Zelitsky thinks the Mega site pre-dates even the ancient Maya--by a lot.

	Recently excavated sculptures by the Olmec and Totonec peoples, also of the Yucatan and Central America, are about 4,500 to 6,000 years old, she said.

	"The Mayan nation came to the Yucatan at much later times and learned the arts and sciences of civilization from earlier nations." We know little of these nations, she said, "thanks to the Spanish church, who burned all their archives."




	The precise age of the underwater site is also unknown, although Cuban archeologists in 1966 excavated a land-based megalithic structure on the western coast, close to the new underwater discovery, said to date from 4000 BC. "Based on that and other geological information, we're speculating that these are 6,000 years old," he explained.



	...	Located at just 20 feet are the mysterious megalithic structures discovered in the 1960s and 1970s in the sound between the Bahamas islands of North and South Bimini. Scientific expeditions there have produced inconclusive results about the shapes' origins.


Olmec and Totonec "sculptures," underwater Bimini (Bimini road?), "land based megalithic structure on west coast"


what is the Bimini one? "Bimini road" northwest of North Bimini. "Cyclopean complex" (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1095-9270.1973.tb00507.x) said to be off coast of paradise point,  sort-of in between but in side bay of North Bimini.

or this thing: https://www.nature.com/articles/230287a0
	Underwater remains of an originally coherent formation of coquina limestone have been misinterpreted as an “enigmatic” stonework emplaced by prehistoric men. Marble and cement cylinders are found nearby. People who require the cylinders to be “pillar fragments” of an Olmec or Atlantean culture might consider a more mundane explanation.


this says paper is about Bimini Road: http://maya-gaia.angelfire.com/shinn_mystique_beachrock.pdf


this guy goes over things found near Bimini and controversy about underwater sites found there

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.585.4297&rep=rep1&type=pdf
	What are the sites being considered in this paper? They are purported to be the remains of high cultures, on the level of the Mayas, located under - water on the Bahama banks. These sites were presumably built when the banks were above water at a time of lower sea level, perhaps 10,000 years ago (c.f., Milliman & Emery, 1968). Much of the controversy has focused on a single site, known as the " road " or " wall " site near the island of Bimini, 45 miles east of Miami, Florida. A small amount of work has been done on a few other sites, including a " temple " near Andros island, and " columns " near Bimini. Numerous other roads, walls, geometrical patterns and pyra - mids have been described, most from aerial sightings, but have in general not been confirmed by independent sightings, nor is it possible to determine the exact locations from the published reports (Berlitz, 1984; Valentine, 1969, 1973, 1976). 


"road" got most attention, but "small amount of work" done on "temple" near Andros island and "columns" near Bimini


	...From almost the day it was discovered, the site has generated controversy. According to Marx (1971), rather than getting caught up in  the Atlantis controversy, Valentine and Rebikoff had hoped to keep the discovery of the road a secret. However, lacking capital for more intensive explorations, they joined forces with aircraft pilots Robert Brush and Trigg Adams, explorers who had been inspired by Cayce. Together they founded the Marine Archaeology Research  Society (MARS). MARS expeditions  in 1969 discovered several more sites of interest near the road, including clusters of cement and marble columns in several locations. 


this is interesting--Bimini road controversy end up poisoning the well for legit things? a way to "bury" an archeological site for good--have a crackpot discover it


pg 5 says guy who debunked it "Harris" was not an archaeologist and skipped some things

an archaologist did his masters thesis on the road and found it was beachrock, then joined up with team that was inviestgating site, found a bunch more columns in patterns and a line of blocks going perpendicular to shoreline and published that

A guy named Zink who was an English professor taught himself archaeology, made numerous TV presentations then somehow became director of Bahamian antiques institute with gov then concluded the beachrock road was a road to atlantis made by aliens

but then Zink found some actually interesting things around the road and a "possible marble sculpture" and wrote up on it and "unfortunately his public presentation made it unlikely any mainstream archeologist would take his work seriously"


Richards talks about two camps fighting over Bimini road, with some findings being ignored by both sides.


pg 12 Valentine gave the location of a site off wildly


	...The problem of discriminating man-made ruins from natural geological formations is by no means unique to these sites. For example, Jones ( 1983), has described the ancient walls in the Menai straits of North Wales.  Even more than  the Bahamas sites, the Welsh sites have persistently been linked with Atlantis. The Welsh walls, which were submerged as the sea level rose, were apparently ancient fish traps. Their builders made use of natural be- drock formations, blending man-made walls in as necessary. Jones notes the difficulty of separating true discoveries of submerged walls from  natural forms said in legends to be sunken Atlantean cities. Jones7 careful study is the type of work sadly lacking in the Bahamas. What is different about these sites in the Bahamas is that the strong views on both sides, combined with the inherent unlikelihood of any ruins at all, have made it difficult to obtain objective descriptions or evaluations of the sites. The reader attempting to assess the evidence usually does not have the opportunity for on-site inspection, and must rely on his perceptions of the reasonableness of the evidence and arguments from both sides. As I will show next, the ways in which the proponents and skeptics  have pursued these claims has emphasized  the extraordinary nature of the explanations, while downplaying the actual evidence and discouraging the resolution of the anomalies. 


Richard on to something?


	...Thus the existence of a  multiplicity of possible sites, most of which  have never been investigated, sets the stage for the long-term persistence of these claims. Ironically, it has not only been the uncritical nature of the popular accounts, but also the polemical tone of the response by the skeptics, which has perpetuated the controversy. 


Richard noticed that some archeologists are assholes


	...On the other hand, the proponents have not done well in the next phase of the investigation: the specialized work which could determine the origin of the sites. Zink (1978) removed potential artifacts without regard to context, making it impossible to determine whether they were in any way associated with the site. 


Zink destroying an archeological site

	
	...Finally, a persecution complex would not be surprising because the pro- ponents are, in fact, persecuted. They have not, however, answered attacks such as those of McKusick with attacks of their own. Their attitude toward the scientific establishment is driven by the need, on the  one  hand,  for popular support in order to survive, and on the other hand, their recognition that scientific methods will be required to validate the anomalies and carry on advanced work. Nevertheless, it is certainly true that they tend to stand by their extraordinary explanations, and have not made a sustained effort to engage in a scientific dialog. Nor, of course, have their opponents. 


end up fighting instead of doing science



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marxist_archaeology
	With the rise of post-processual archaeology in the 1980s and 1990s, forms of Marxist archaeology were once more popularised amongst the archaeological community.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post-processual_archaeology
	Post-processual archaeology, which is sometimes alternately referred to as the interpretative archaeologies by its adherents,[1][2] is a movement in archaeological theory that emphasizes the subjectivity of archaeological interpretations. Despite having a vague series of similarities, post-processualism consists of "very diverse strands of thought coalesced into a loose cluster of traditions".


hmmm


this is interesting: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_American_social_archaeology


https://www.jstor.org/stable/282518?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

apparently there was a debate over how influential commie archeology was in Latin America



	Researchers at the National Geographic Society, whose planned trip to Cuba this summer fizzled due to bad weather and permit problems, say they hope to travel here next year.

	"The formation of the Earth took such violent turns at times, it could be many, many things. You will always have people contending that, for example, the pyramids were built by aliens," said John Echave, senior editor at National Geographic magazine, who came to Havana last fall and studied the sonar and video images.



	"They are interesting anomalies, but that's just as much as anyone can say right now," said John Echave, senior editor of National Geographic Magazine, who traveled to Cuba to study the sonar images.

	"But I'm no expert on sonar," he said, "and until we are able to actually go down there and see, it will be difficult to characterize them."

	Echave pointed out that hard-to-explain undersea geologic formations have cropped up elsewhere in the world, too, in places such as Japan and nearby in the Bahamas.



	Dr. Robert Ballard is explorer-in-residence for the National Geographic Society and is founder and president of the Institute for Exploration at Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Conn. He is best known, however, for the 1985 dicovery of the passenger liner Titanic deep in the North Atlantic.

	Ballard said he has heard of the formations in the Yucatan Channel but is not convinced they are the work of humans.

	"That's too deep," he said of the 2,000-foot site. "I'd be surprised if it was human. You have to ask yourself, how did it get there?

	"I've looked at a lot of sonar images in my life," Ballard said, "and it can be sort of like looking at an ink blot--people can sometimes see what they want to see. I'll just wait for a bit more data."



	The National Geographic Society has expressed interest and is considering an expedition in manned submarines next summer, according to Sylvia Earl, a famed American oceanographer and explorer-in-residence at the society.

	"It's intriguing," Earl said in an interview from her Oakland, Calif., home. "It is so compelling that I think we need to go check it out."

	Earl said a planned expedition this past summer was canceled because of funding problems. But she said National Geographic hopes to explore the site next summer as part of its Sustainable Seas research program.

	Earl has visited Cuba and described the preliminary evidence as "fantastic" and "extraordinary." But she stressed that as a "skeptical scientist," she would assume that the unusual stones were formed naturally until scientific evidence proved otherwise.

	"There is so much speculation about ancient civilizations," she said. "I'm in tune with the reality and the science, not the myths or stories or fantasies."






The question of what the structures were made of was also raised in press reports. December 2001 reports after the July ROV expedition said the blocks had a granite-like appearance. According to Posner, Ziletsky initially thought the megaliths were limestone, but Cuban geologists said the stones were "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation" and thought they were granite. 



	...The images the robot brought back confirmed the presence of huge, smooth blocks with the appearance of cut granite.



	She said the project team, which includes Mr. Weinzweig, her son Ernesto Tapanes and representatives of Cuba's Academy of Sciences, was initially "very suspicious of the site's manmade nature," and thought the megaliths might be limestone.

	Cuban geologists have recently said the stones are "too smooth and too hard to be a natural limestone formation. Geologists think they are granite."



	"Large structures in the middle of a desert," Zelitsky called them. Because of their white appearance underwater, Zelitsky said the structures appear to be granite--a good building stone but one foreign to that part of the world.

	"There is no granite in Cuba or the Yucatan," Zelitsky said. "That area features limestone." Granite is found in Central Mexico, however, and was used by ancient people such as the Maya and an older civilization, the Olmec, in their construction of cities and buildings.



TODO: finish this, clean up



------


Zelitsky's memior:

https://books.google.com/books?id=q9MonwEACAAJ&dq=paulina+zelitsky&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj4jMjj8vLaAhVlg-AKHbQ2DrEQ6AEIKTAA
	In the autumn of 1968, I found myself in a situation that was both improbable and perilous. Having only recently graduated in marine engineering and married to my classmate, also a recently graduated Cuban naval architect, I was assigned to work with a Soviet marine terminals design team in Cuba. As if it would not be enough on my plate trying to learn and to fulfill my first engineering mandate, in addition to taking care of my husband and our two small children, one of them still only a baby, I was re-assigned temporarily to a small group of Soviet naval designers who were developing a top-secret Soviet submarine base in Cuba.

	The main purpose of this base was to provide secure terminals for the fleet of Soviet nuclear subs armed with ballistic and cruise missiles with nuclear warheads. Located in Cienfuegos in the southwest of the island, this Soviet submarine base was built in Cuba in secret at a time of great tension during the Cold War between America and the USSR. This Soviet submarine base operated from Cuba in secret for over 20 years in contravention of international agreements. Neither the Soviet nor Cuban Governments ever admitted to its existence, just as they have never admitted to the existence of Lourdes - the world's largest Soviet spy SIGINT center in Cuba, which operated for 360 years. By 1971, for reasons that will become clear, I wanted to defect from both Cuba and the Soviet Union.

	...The Cuba system was less oppressive than the Soviet; except, that the whole country appeared to have fallen into a hypnotic spell under its charasmatic leader Fidel Castro. His relentless grip on power reminded me of our Soviet leaders who had inflicted terrible sufferings upon the people of my country. Of course, the contrasts were marked: Cuba was only an island and, compared to our drab leaders, Fidel was a handsome Caribbean version of the "great dictator", hot for power and numb to the suffering of his people. Yet, he was exceptionally crafty and deceptive about his true ambitions. Still, my life in Cuba was an improvement compared to Soviet society with its dismal complacency and lifestyles frozen in fear. In fact, Cuban revolutionaries looked so exotic, romantic and attractive that I married one.



this explains a lot


http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.585.4297&rep=rep1&type=pdf
	Abstract-

	Controversial claims have been made for the presence of anomalous underwater archaeological sites in the Bahamas by a number of investigators. The proponents emphasize extraordinary explanations for the anomalies and tend to bypass the scientific journals in favor of popular presentations with little scientific rigor. The skeptics debunk selected claims for some of the sites, do not adequately address the prominent anomalous aspects, and attempt to fit explanations with which they dis- agree into a general category of cult archaeology. This paper reviews the work of the proponents and skeptics, discusses some of the reasons why they are unable to reach agreement, and addresses the relevance of the controversy to the response of the archaeological community to extraordinary claims.





https://www.csicop.org/si/show/geologists_adventures_with_bimini_beachrock/author/eugeneashinn
	Natural submerged beachrock off the island of Bimini in the Bahamas has been deemed a remnant of Atlantis by the faithful since the 1960s. In spite of geological research demonstrating the stones are natural, “true believers” continue to be drawn by the strong “force field.”



http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.585.4297&rep=rep1&type=pdf
	...The next major player on the scene was David Zink, an English professor from Lamar University in Texas. Zink, who intensively studied the road site from 1974 to 1979 in a series of expeditions, was also an amateur, self- taught in archaeology. He enlisted the help of several geologists and archaeologists, however, and his work had the potential of being the definitive study of the road site.

	...Zink's major contribution was a detailed mapping of the entire site, far more than the few blocks studied by Gifford. ...In several cases, large blocks are resting on smaller blocks beneath, although this does not appear to be a true second course of blocks. Zink was also the only investigator to address another important archaeological issue: the presence or absence of artifacts in addition to the blocks themselves. Although he recovered a stone building block and a possible marble sculpture, the context was not preserved and the artifacts themselves were undatable.

	...Zink (1978) removed potential artifacts without regard to context, making it impossible to determine whether they were in any way associated with the site.

	...His 1978 book, The Stones of Atlantis, not only concluded that the road was the ruins of an Atlantean structure, but that extraterrestrials from the Pleiades had been involved in its construction. Placing himself in the camp of the UFO and Bermuda Triangle advocates, he alienated himself even from the supporters of the Edgar Cayce Atlantis theory

	...Unfortunately, Zink's popular presentation made it unlikely that any mainstream archaeologist would take his work seriously. 


https://www.newspapers.com/image/148821174/?terms=Paulina%2BZelitsky
	Zelitsky shies from using the term "Atlantis,"


https://www.newspapers.com/image/329141599/
	"Nothing is known for certain now," Weinzweig said, "but oral tradition in early Mexico speaks of an advanced civlization of tall white people who came from the East, and of an island that sank in a great natural disaster." In the ancient language of some early Central American Indians, he said, "the word Atlanticu means 'our good father,' or, 'the place where our good father rests.'"
