https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liu_Shaoqi
	For 15 years, President Liu was the third most powerful man in China, behind only Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai. Originally groomed as Mao's successor, Liu antagonized him in the early 1960s before the Cultural Revolution, and from 1966 onward was criticized, then purged, by Mao. Liu disappeared from public life in 1968 and was labelled the "commander of China's bourgeoisie headquarters", China's foremost "capitalist-roader", and a traitor to the revolution.


3rd guy behind Zhou, originally to be Mao's succesor, antagonized him before cultural revolution and became "commander of bourgeoisie headquarters"

	
	He died under harsh treatment in late 1969, but was posthumously rehabilitated by Deng Xiaoping's government in 1980 and granted a national memorial service.


killed in 1969, Deng rehabilitated him


	...Liu was born into a moderately rich peasant family in Huaminglou village,[1] Ningxiang, Hunan province;[2] his ancestral hometown is located at Jishui County, Jiangxi. He attended Ningxiang Zhusheng Middle School (Chinese: 宁乡驻省中学; pinyin: Nìngxiāng Zhùshěng zhōngxué), and was recommended to attend a class in Shanghai to prepare for studying in Russia. In 1920, he and Ren Bishi joined a Socialist Youth Corps; the next year, Liu was recruited to study at the Comintern's University of the Toilers of the East in Moscow.[1]


joined socialist youth corps and got recruited for comintern university of moscow

	
	He joined the newly formed Communist Party of China (CPC) in 1921. The next year he returned to China, and as secretary of the All-China Labor Syndicate led several railway workers' strikes, in the Yangzi Valley and at Anyuan on the Jiangxi-Hunan border.[1]


became secretary of "All-China Labor Syndicate" and led reailway workers strikes

led a bunch of other campaigns and strikes, arrested, helped organize Canton-Hong Kong strike

became head of CCP central committee labor department then elected to politburo of Chinese Soviet Republic 1931


	...Senior leader

	Liu became the Party Secretary of Fujian Province in 1932. He accompanied the Long March in 1934 at least as far as the crucial Zunyi Conference, but was then sent to the so-called "White Areas" (areas controlled by the Kuomintang) to reorganize underground activities in northern China, centered around Beijing and Tianjin. He became Party Secretary in North China in 1936, leading the anti-Japanese movements in that area with the assistance of Peng Zhen, An Ziwen, Bo Yibo, Ke Qingshi, Liu Lantao, and Yao Yilin. Liu ran the Central Plains Bureau in 1939; and, in 1941, the Central China Bureau. Some Japanese sources have alleged that the activities of his organization sparked the Marco Polo Bridge Incident in July 1937, which gave Japan the excuse to launch the Second Sino-Japanese War.[7]


did some underground work in KMT areas, some say his organization helped launch second Sino-Japanese war

	
	In 1937, Liu traveled to the Communist base at Yanan; in 1941, he became a political commissar of the New Fourth Army.[7] He was elected as one of five CPC Secretaries at the Seventh National Party Congress in 1945. After that Congress, he became the supreme leader of all Communist forces in Manchuria and northern China,[7] a stature frequently overlooked by historians.


became supreme leader of all communist forces in Manchuria and northern china and this is frequently overlooked by historians

what did he do in his capacity as leader of Communist forces there? iirc the war ended up that KMT did most of the fighting and it gave communist forces advantage by the end


	...Liu's work focused on party organizational and theoretical affairs.[8] He was an orthodox Soviet-style Communist, and favored state planning and the development of heavy industry. He elaborated upon his political and economic beliefs in his writings. His best known works include How to be a Good Communist (1939), On the Party (1945), and Internationalism and Nationalism (1952).


did some communist theory stuff?


	...Liu spoke very strongly in favour of the Great Leap Forward at the Eighth CPC National Congress in May 1958.[9] At this Congress Liu stood together with Deng Xiaoping and Peng Zhen in support of Mao's policies against those who were more critical, such as Chen Yun and Zhou Enlai.


spoke "very strongly" in favor of great leap forward with Deng and Phen Zhen, opposed Chen Yun and Zhou Enlai


	As a result, Liu gained influence within the party; in April 1959, he succeeded Mao as President of the People's Republic of China. However, Liu began to voice indications of concern about the outcomes of the Great Leap in the August 1959 Lushan Plenum.[9] In order to correct the mistakes of the Great Leap Forward, Liu and Deng led economic reforms that bolstered their prestige among the party apparatus and the national populace. Once, he said to Mao: "People write books about cannibalism!" [10] The economic policies of Deng and Liu were notable for being more moderate than Mao's radical ideas.


succeed Mao as president (not actually leader) in 1959, starting saying concenrs with outcome in August 1959 Lushan PLenum, led some reforms with Deng that made them more popular.

said to Mao "people write books about cannibalism!"


	... Liu himself chaired the enlarged Politburo meeting that officially began the Cultural Revolution. However, Liu and his political allies quickly lost control of the Cultural Revolution soon after it was called, when Mao used the movement to progressively monopolize political power and to destroy his perceived enemies.[13]

	Whatever its other causes, the Cultural Revolution, declared in 1966, was overtly pro-Maoist, and gave Mao the power and influence to purge the Party of his political enemies at the highest levels of government.


Liu became target of cultural revolution, pro-Maoist and iirc bolstered his personality cult

Lin Biao was sided with Mao and helped with that along with Jiang I think... what was going on there?


	...Liu was beaten regularly at public denunciation meetings after his arrest in 1967. He was denied medicine for his diabetes, by then a long-term illness, and for pneumonia, which he developed after his arrest. Liu was eventually given treatment only when Jiang Qing feared he would die; she desired that Liu be kept alive to serve as a "living target" during the Ninth Party Congress in 1969.[17]


Jiang said to have wanted to keep him alive as target


	At the Congress, Liu was denounced as a traitor and an enemy agent. Zhou Enlai read the Party verdict that Liu was "a criminal traitor, enemy agent and scab in the service of the imperialists, modern revisionists and the Kuomintang reactionaries". Liu's conditions did not improve after he was denounced in the Congress, and he died soon afterward.[17][18]


did Mao think Liu was a traitor working for imperialists?

would be interesting if Mao himself thought he was duped into starting great famine


	...In February 1980, two years after Deng Xiaoping came to power, the Fifth Plenum of the 11th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China issued the "Resolution on the Rehabilitation of Comrade Liu Shaoqi". The resolution declared Liu's ouster to be unjust and removed the labels of "renegade, traitor and scab" that had been attached to him at the time of his death. It also declared him to be "a great Marxist and proletarian revolutionary" and recognized him as one of the principal leaders of the Party. Lin Biao was blamed for "concocting false evidence" against Liu, and for working with the Gang of Four to subject him to "political frame-up and physical persecution".


Deng's government blamed Lin Biao for "concocting false evidnece" against Liu in league with gang of four