https://books.google.com/books/about/Tombstone.html?id=bvs9cS8lzhEC	
	In order to understand how China descended into catastrophic famine and starvation, it is necessary to understand the “Three Red Banners” of the Chinese Communist Party—the General Line, the Great Leap Forward, and the people’s communes. Serving as the political banners that were to lead the Chinese into communism, they sparked the fanaticism of 1958, and as such can also be considered the direct cause of the Great Famine.

	Yet China’s rulers regarded this source of calamity as a precious treasure. From 1958 until just before the launch of reform in 1978, one’s attitude toward the Three Red Banners was a major criterion for determining loyalty—or lack of same—to the party.

	The “General Line” was shorthand for the “General Line for socialist construction.” It referred to the directive to “go all out, aim high, and build socialism with greater, faster, better, and more economical results.”1 The news media spread the message that “speed is the soul of the General Line,” and the Great Leap Forward was the embodiment of that ideal. Conceptually, therefore, the General Line and the Great Leap Forward were one and the same, with the General Line emphasizing guiding ideology and the Great Leap Forward emphasizing action; the Great Leap Forward was action guided by the General Line.


Yang says "three red banners" direct cause of the famine

general line, great leap forward, and people's communes

how did all the policies come together to make starvation?

"speed is the soul of the General Line"--wanted to do it quickly


	...ZHOU ENLAI INITIATES THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST “RASH ADVANCE”

	The term “rash advance” (maojin) that became current at this time referred to proceeding too rapidly without due consideration of actual circumstances and likely consequences. Opposition to rash advance in economic construction first arose in early 1956 and continued until early 1957. The main opponents to rash advance were senior officials in charge of economic affairs in the State Council, including Zhou Enlai, Chen Yun, Li Xiannian, and Bo Yibo. They later formed the backbone of China’s “pragmatic faction,” and, following the deaths of Mao and Zhou, they became a major force shaping China’s economic policies in the reformist 1980s.


Zhou Enlai, Chen Yun, Li Xiannian, and Bo Yibo were "pragmatic faction" and main opponents to "rash advance"

big question: were each making an honest effort at it, or finding ways to piss Mao off or make him suspicious?

an example might be Fermi's "minority report" added on to Oppenheimers report given to Truman before evaluating "cry baby scientists" assessment on whether or not to build H-bomb

Liu Shaoqi equated being careful with "the conservative route"--did Mao think along these lines?

usually people who are easily manipulated are worried about some great conspiracy to undermine them--something else to look for

New Yorker article says "Apprised of the catastrophe in Xinyang, Mao blamed “counter-revolutionaries” and “ruthless class retaliation” by Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists"


	Fearing attack for right deviationism, all levels of government elevated economic targets from 1955 onward. Capital construction rose precipitously, and the number of projects proliferated, putting enormous pressure on steel and cement production. Provinces and cities added their own projects. Zhou Enlai, who was in charge of State Council work, was sure the plans were impossible, and pointed out the emergence of a “phenomenon of impetuous and rash advance.”10

	After careful consideration, Zhou Enlai, Li Fuchun, and Li Xiannian, at a planning and finance meeting on February 6, 1956, reduced the capital construction investment for 1957 from 18 billion to 14.7 billion yuan. Even so, the capital construction budget was 68 percent higher than for the year before.11

	During the State Council’s Twenty-fourth Plenum, on February 8 [1956], Zhou said, “It would be very dangerous to rush into projects that … have no basis in reality.” “If the leader becomes too hot-headed, a splash of cold water might clear his mind … Please, everyone, be practical and realistic.”12

	In late April, however, during a Politburo meeting Mao proposed increasing the capital construction budget by 2 billion yuan. Zhou disagreed, but Mao persisted with his own view and adjourned the meeting. Afterward, Zhou went to Mao and said, “As premier, I cannot in good conscience agree with this decision.” This infuriated Mao.

	Starting in May, Zhou began correcting the rash advance. During a full meeting of the State Council on May 11, for example, he suddenly said, “The campaign against conservatism and right deviation … can’t go on forever!”13


says there was a backdrop of fear of being accused of "right deviation"? how did that come about?

did Zhou Enlai start the term "rash advance"?

Zhou and Mao argued over capital construction budget 24th plenum feb 8 1956

previously cut from 18 to 14.7 billion yuan, Mao wanted to increase 2 billion

Mao got "infurated" with him after Zhou told him disagreed after meeting

then during meeting May 11, set "campaign against conservatism and right deviation ... can't go on forever!"

I guess Mao would hate Zhou and think him a "right deviant?" what made him want to increase budget anyway?


	Then, in May 1956, the CCP Central Committee decided that economic development required opposing both conservatism and rash advance. The draft budget that the Ministry of Finance submitted to the Politburo for discussion on June 3 echoed the preference for balance. Presided over by Liu Shaoqi, the Politburo on June 10 approved in principle the draft budget and assigned Mao’s secretary, Hu Qiaomu, to amend it in accordance with the views expressed. The capital construction budget for 1957 was reduced again from 14.7 billion yuan to 14 billion yuan.14


eventually decided on "opposing both conservatism and rash advance", balance


	The CCP Central Committee’s Propaganda Department took charge of drafting a People’s Daily editorial stating that “Impetuous emotion has become a serious problem at present, because it exists … first and foremost among the upper ranks of the leading cadres … no departments wanted to be accused of right-deviating conservatism, and they vied to assign the most aggressive targets to the lower levels, with each level passing an even heavier burden on to the level below, ultimately resulting in an intolerable situation.” Before it was published, the editorial was sent to Mao for approval. He annotated it with four words: “I’m not reading it.”15


CCP propaganda dept getting involved? send Mao report saying "impetious emotion" and fight over targets a problem, Mao says "I'm not reading it"


	While working out the Second Five-Year Plan and the 1957 economic plan, Zhou and others continued to counter rash advance and reduced some excessively high economic targets.16 These moves were reflected upon during the Eighth National Congress of the CCP, convened September 5–27, 1956. Liu Shaoqi’s political report contained two assessments. First, “Our country’s contradiction between the proletariat and the capitalist class has been basically resolved. The millennia-long history of the system of class exploitation has been basically brought to a close, and socialism has been basically established as the social system of our country.” The implication that class struggle had been concluded formed the basis for a new assessment of what constituted China’s main domestic contradiction: “Our country’s main domestic contradiction is the contradiction between the people’s demands to establish an advanced industrial nation and the reality of a backward agricultural nation; it is the contradiction between the needs of the people for the rapid development of the economy and culture, and the present conditions under which the economy and culture cannot satisfy the people’s needs.” In short, economic construction was now the crux of the matter.


Liu Shaoqi choice of words interesting

Mao obsessed with "contradiction" and some weird theory about it (wrote an essay "on contradiction")

Liu get how Mao thinks?

apparently there was a "contradiction" with capitalist class until 1957 but it was now over, and the new "contradiction" was need to solve "backward agricultural nation"


	Zhou Enlai’s report on the Second Five-Year Plan, approved by the Eighth National Party Congress in September, stressed that “the party’s responsibility is to take pains at all times to prevent and correct any tendency toward right-deviating conservatism or left-leaning risk-taking.” The real target was rash advance.

	In a parliamentary system, Mao might have been obliged to resign. In China, however, his paramount position was extremely stable. He was not about to let his subordinates violate his wishes; he would retaliate against the opposition to rash advance when he found the right opportunity.


Zhou sounding smarter, saying "correct any tendency toward right-deviation conservatism or left-leaning risk-taking"

evolution from "right deviation campaign must end" might say something?


------


	MAO CRITICIZES THE OPPOSITION TO RASH ADVANCE

	A year later, by the second half of 1957, anti-Soviet uprisings in Poland and Hungary had been quelled, and China’s Anti-Rightist Campaign had concluded; the First Five-Year Plan had been completed; and an upsurge in irrigation and water conservancy projects had begun. Mao decided that circumstances were favorable for his counterattack.

	At the Third Enlarged Plenum of the Eighth CCP Central Committee on October 9, 1957, Mao declared:

	Last year several things were swept out. One of the things swept out was “greater, faster, better, and more economical” … everyone was opposed to greater and faster, which some comrades called “rash” … We always need to strive to achieve as much and as quickly as possible, and only oppose the subjective sense of “greater” and “faster.” In the second half of last year, a gust of wind swept out that slogan, and I want to restore it. I want all of you to look into this.

	Also swept out was the Forty-Point Program for Agricultural Development. That forty-point program fell into bad odor last year, and now it will be restored.

	Also swept out were the committees for promoting progress. I have asked in the past whether the nature of the Communist Party … at all levels … is that of promoting or of hindering progress. They should be promoting progress. I see the Kuomintang as a committee for hindering progress and the Communist Party as a committee for promoting progress. The wind that blew up last year swept out the committees for promoting progress, so can we restore them now? If you all disagree with restoring them and insist on organizing a committee for hindering progress, with so many of you preferring hindrance there’s nothing I can do … Those who wish to hinder us are members of that rightist Zhang-Luo Alliance.17

	For Mao to equate those who opposed rash advance with a “committee for hindering progress” and to group them with the Kuomintang and the freshly denounced “rightist Zhang-Luo Alliance” was extremely damaging. Now opposition was tantamount to being a counterrevolutionary.


Mao apparently stewing, upset "some comrades" called his plans (how did he think of them?) "rash"

Mao equated hindering his plans with Koumintang and "rightist Zhang-Lou Alliance"


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhou_Enlai
	Nankai Middle School was founded by Yan Xiu, a prominent scholar and philanthropist, and headed by Zhang Boling, one of the most important Chinese educators of the 20th century.[16] Nankai's teaching methods were unusual by contemporary Chinese standards. By the time Zhou began attending, it had adopted the educational model used at the Phillips Academy in the United States.[17] The school's reputation, with its "highly disciplined" daily routine and "strict moral code",[18] attracted many students who later became prominent in public life. Zhou's friends and classmates there ranged from Ma Jun (an early communist leader executed in 1927) to K. C. Wu (later mayor of Shanghai and governor of Taiwan under the Nationalist party).[19] Zhou's talents also attracted the attention of Yan Xiu and Zhang Boling. Yan in particular thought highly of Zhou, helping to pay for his studies in Japan and later France.[20]


Zhou got Western education


	...Zhou returned to Tianjin sometime in the spring of 1919. Historians disagree over his participation in the May Fourth Movement (May to June 1919). Zhou's "official" Chinese biography states that he was a leader of the Tianjin student protests in the May Fourth movement,[31] but many modern scholars believe that it is highly unlikely that Zhou participated at all, based on the total lack of direct evidence among the surviving records from the period.[31][32]


historical debate about him

	
	...His political activities continued to expand, and in September, he and several other students agreed to establish the "Awakening Society", a small group, never numbering more than 25.[35] In explaining the goals and purpose of the Awakening Society, Zhou declared that "anything that is incompatible with progress in current times, such as militarism, the bourgeoisie, partylords, bureaucrats, inequality between men and women, obstinate ideas, obsolete morals, old ethics... should be abolished or reformed"

	...In some ways, the Awakening Society resembled the clandestine Marxist study group at Peking University headed by Li Dazhao, with the group members using numbers instead of names for "secrecy". (Zhou was "Number Five", a pseudonym which he continued to use in later years.)


in with sketchy-sounding society against "old ethics"


	...After Zhou's release, he and the Awakening Society met with several Beijing organizations and agreed to form a "Reform Federation"; during these activities Zhou became more familiar with Li Dazhao and met Zhang Shenfu, who was the contact between Li in Beijing and Chen Duxiu in Shanghai. Both men were organizing underground Communist cells in cooperation with Grigori Voitinsky[citation needed], a Comintern agent, but Zhou apparently did not meet Voitinsky at this point.


in with underground comintern movement early


	...After five weeks in London he moved to Paris, where interest in Russia's 1917 October Revolution was high. In a letter to his cousin, Zhou identified two broad paths of reform for China: "gradual reform" (as in England) or "violent means" (as in Russia). Zhou wrote that "I do not have a preference for either the Russian or the British way... I would prefer something in-between, rather than one of these two extremes".[42]


visting west, writing unsure between "British Way" or Russian revolution--could be things Mao could pick on to be suspicious of him, not sure


	Still interested in academic programs, Zhou traveled to Britain in January 1921 to visit Edinburgh University. Concerned by financial problems and language requirements, he did not enroll, returning to France at the end of January. There are no records of Zhou entering any academic program in France. In spring 1921, he joined a Chinese Communist cell.[43] 


anything going on here?


	...Zhou's move to Berlin was perhaps because the relatively "lenient" political atmosphere in Berlin made it more favorable as a base for overall European organizing.[47] In addition, the Western European Secretariat of the Comintern was located in Berlin and it is clear that Zhou had important Comintern connections, though the nature of these is disputed.[48] 


another historical debate


	...In June 1923, the Third Congress of the Chinese Communist Party accepted the Comintern's instructions to ally with the KMT, led at the time by Sun Yat-sen. These instructions called for CCP members to join the Nationalist Party as "individuals", while still retaining their association with the CCP. After joining the KMT, they would work to lead and direct it, transforming it into a vehicle of revolution. Within several years, this strategy would become the source of serious conflict between the KMT and the CCP.[52]

	Zhou not only joined the KMT, but actually helped organize the founding of the Nationalist Party European branch in November 1923. Under Zhou's influence, most of the European branch's officers were in fact communists. Zhou's wide-ranging contacts and personal relationships formed during this period were central to his career. Important party leaders, such as Zhu De and Nie Rongzhen, were first admitted to the party by Zhou.

	By 1924, the Soviet-Nationalist alliance was expanding rapidly and Zhou was summoned back to China for further work. He left Europe probably in late July 1924,[53] returning to China as one of the most senior Chinese Communist Party members in Europe.


involvited with communist infiltration of KMT, became important member of KMT


	...The exact positions Zhou held at Whampoa and the dates he held them are not clear. A few months after his arrival, possibly October 1924, he became deputy director of the Academy's Political Department, and later, possibly November 1924, director of the department.[55] Even though it was technically responsible to the central government, Zhou's political department operated under a direct mandate to indoctrinate Whampoa's cadets in the ideology of the KMT for the purpose of improving loyalty and morale. 


being political department director at Whampoa


	...Zhou's activities immediately after his removal from his positions at Whampoa are uncertain. An earlier biographer claims that Chiang Kai-shek put Zhou in charge of "an advanced training center for the CCP members and commissars withdrawn from the army".[71] More recent Chinese Communist sources claim that Zhou had an important role at this time in securing Communist control of Ye Ting's Independent Regiment. The regiment and Ye Ting later played a leading role in the Communists' first major military action, the Nanchang Revolt.[61]


another historical debate on what secret communist things Zhou was doing after Chiang Kai-Shek ousted communists from Whampoa


	...Zhou was transferred to Shanghai to assist in these activities, probably in late 1926. It seems he was not present for the first uprising on 23–24 October,[72] but he was certainly in Shanghai by December 1926. Early accounts credit Zhou with labor organizing activities in Shanghai after his arrival, or, more credibly, working to "strengthen the indoctrination of political workers in labor unions and smuggle arms for the strikers."[73] Reports that Zhou "organized" or "ordered" the second and third uprisings on 20 February and 21 March exaggerate his role. Major decisions during this period were made by the Communist head in Shanghai, Chen Duxiu, the Party's general secretary, with a special committee of eight party officials coordinating Communist actions. The committee also consulted closely on decisions with the Comintern representatives in Shanghai, headed by Grigori Voitinsky.[74] The partial documentation available for this period shows that Zhou headed the Communist Party Central Committee's Military Commission in Shanghai.[75] He participated in both the February and March actions, but was not the guiding hand in either event, instead working with A. P. Appen, the Soviet military advisor to the Central Committee, training the pickets of the General Labor Union, the Communist controlled labor organization in Shanghai. He also worked to make union strong arm squads more effective when the Communists declared a "Red Terror" after the failed February uprising; this action resulted in the murder of twenty "anti-union" figures, and the kidnapping, beating, and intimidation of others associated with anti-union activities.[76]


helpd with Shanghai uprisings working with comintern agents, I guess directed some "union strong arm squads" to kill and intimidate some "anti-union" people

	
	...Despite rumors that Chiang had put a high price on Zhou's head, he was quickly released by Bai Chongxi's forces. The reasons for Zhou's sudden release may have been that Zhou was then the most senior Communist in Shanghai, that Chiang's efforts to exterminate the Shanghai Communists were highly secretive at the time


mysteriously released by Bai Chongxi's forces after being captured

	
	...in May 1927, and Chiang's troops began an organized purge of Communists in territories formerly controlled by Wang.[81] In mid-July Zhou was forced to go underground.[80]

	Pressured by their Comintern advisors, and themselves convinced that the "revolutionary high tide" had arrived, the Communists decided to launch a series of military revolts.[82] The first of these was the Nanchang Revolt. Zhou was sent to oversee the event, but the moving figures seem to have been Tan Pingshan and Li Lisan, while the main military figures were Ye Ting and He Long. In military terms, the revolt was a disaster, with the Communists' forces decimated and scattered.[83]

	Zhou himself contracted malaria during the campaign, and was secretly sent to Hong Kong for medical treatment by Nie Rongzhen and Ye Ting. After reaching Hong Kong, Zhou was disguised as a businessman named "Li", and entrusted to the care of local Communists. In a subsequent meeting of the CCP Central Committee, Zhou was blamed for the failure of the Nanchang campaign and temporarily demoted to being an alternate member of the Politburo.[84]


after purge, Zhou underground, pressured by comintern advisors to launch military revolts and sent to oversee Nanchang Revolt. Revolt was a disaster and Zhou was blamed for the failure and temporarily demoted. Zhou got malaria during campaign and was sent to Hong Kong for medical treatment disguised as a businesman.


	...After the failure of the Nanchang Uprising, Zhou left China for the Soviet Union to attend the Chinese Communist Party's (CCP) Sixth National Party Congress in Moscow, in June–July 1928.[85] The Sixth Congress had to be held in Moscow because conditions in China were considered dangerous. KMT control was so tight that many Chinese delegates attending the Sixth Congress were forced to travel in disguise: Zhou himself was disguised as an antiquarian.[86]


traveled in disguise to moscow for secret communist instructions in 1928


	At the Sixth Congress, Zhou delivered a long speech insisting that conditions in China were not favorable for immediate revolution, and that the main task of the CCP should be to develop revolutionary momentum by winning over the support of the masses in the countryside and establishing a Soviet regime in southern China, similar to the one that Mao Zedong and Zhu De were already establishing around Jiangxi. The Congress generally accepted Zhou's assessment as accurate. Xiang Zhongfa was made secretary general of the Party, but was soon found incapable of fulfilling his role, so Zhou emerged as the de facto leader of the CCP. Zhou was only thirty years old.[86]


Zhou in leadership position here and generally that way in some events before this. Became "de factor leader" of CCP in 1928 and apparently they listened to his ideas for planning communist takeover of China there


	After arriving back in Shanghai in 1929, Zhou began to work underground, establishing and overseeing a network of independent Communist cells. Zhou's greatest danger in his underground work was the threat of being discovered by the KMT secret police, which had been established in 1928 with the specific mission of identifying and eliminating Communists. In order to avoid detection, Zhou and his wife changed residences at least once a month, and used a variety of aliases. Zhou often disguised himself as a businessman, sometimes wearing a beard. Zhou was careful that only two or three people ever knew his whereabouts. Zhou disguised all urban Party offices, made sure that CCP offices never shared the same buildings when in the same city, and required all Party members to use passwords to identify one another. Zhou restricted all of his meetings to either before 7AM or after 7PM. Zhou never used public transportation, and avoided being seen in public places.[90]


started doing secret communist cell spy work to evade KMT secret police in 1929. Used aliases, disguises, "careful only two or three people eer knew his whereabouts."

	
	In November 1928, the CCP also established its own intelligence agency (the "Special Service section of the Central Committee", or "Zhongyang Teke" (Chinese:中央特科), often abbreviated as "Teke"), which Zhou subsequently came to control.


controled CCP's intelligence agency!

	
	Zhou's chief lieutenants were Gu Shunzhang, who had strong ties to Chinese secret societies and became an alternate member of the Politburo, and Xiang Zhongfa. Teke had four operational sections: one for the protection and safety of Party members; one for intelligence gathering; one for facilitating internal communications; and, one to conduct assassinations, a team that became known as the "Red Squad" (红队).[91]


including special section for assassinations


	...In late April 1931 Zhou's chief aide in security affairs, Gu Shunzhang, was arrested by the KMT in Wuhan. Gu was a former labour organizer with strong mafia connections and weak commitments to the CCP. Under threat of heavy torture, Gu gave the KMT secret police detailed accounts of underground CCP organizations in Wuhan, leading to the arrest and executions of over ten senior CCP leaders in the city. Gu offered to provide the KMT with details of CCP activities in Shanghai, but only if he could give the information directly to Chiang Kai-shek.[93]


one of Zhou's cheif lieutenants Gu Shunzhang gave up members of CCP to KMT

	
	...Zhou's reaction to Gu's betrayal was extreme. More than fifteen members of Gu's family, some of whom worked for Teke, were murdered by the Red Squad and buried in quiet residential areas of Shanghai. The Red Squad then assassinated Wang Bing, a leading member of the KMT secret police who was known for moving around Shanghai in rickshaws, without the protection of bodyguards. Most surviving CCP members were relocated to the Communist base in Jiangxi. Because most senior staff had become exposed by Gu, most of its best agents were also relocated. Zhou's most senior aide not yet under suspicion, Pan Hannian, became Teke's director.[95]


Zhou got in spy war with KMT and started killing them with Red Squad

	
	The night before he was scheduled to leave Shanghai in June 1931, Xiang Zhongfa, who was one of Zhou's most senior agents, decided to spend the night in a hotel with his mistress, ignoring Zhou's warnings about the danger. In the morning, a KMT informant who had been trailing Xiang spotted him as he was leaving the hotel. Xiang was immediately arrested and imprisoned within the French Concession. Zhou attempted to prevent Xiang's expected extradition to KMT-controlled China by having his agents bribe the chief of police in the French Concession, but the KMT authorities appealed directly to the authorities of the French Concession, ensuring that the chief of police could not intervene. Zhou's hopes that Xiang would be transferred to Nanjing, giving him an opportunity to kidnap Xiang, also came to naught. The French agreed to transfer Xiang to the Shanghai Garrison Headquarters, under the command of General Xiong Shihui, who subjected Xiang to relentless torture and interrogation. Once he became convinced that Xiang had given his torturers all the information that they requested, Chiang Kai-shek ordered Xiang to be executed.[96]


Zhou was unable to stop Xiang Zhongfa from being executed (anything interesting here?)


	...After establishing a new Politburo Standing Committee in Shanghai, Zhou and his wife relocated to the Communist base in Jiangxi near the end of 1931.[96] By the time Zhou left Shanghai, he was one of the most wanted men in China.[97]


after spy war Zhou was one of the most wanted men in China


	...Even before moving to Jiangxi, Zhou had become involved in the politics of these bases. Mao, claiming the need to eliminate counterrevolutionaries and Anti-Bolsheviks operating within the CCP, began an ideological purge of the populace inside the Jiangxi Soviet. Zhou, perhaps due to his own success planting moles within various levels of the KMT, agreed that an organized campaign to uncover subversion was justified, and supported the campaign as de facto leader of the CCP.[98]

	Mao's efforts soon developed into a ruthless campaign driven by paranoia and aimed not only at KMT spies, but at anyone with an ideological outlook different from Mao's. Suspects were commonly tortured until they confessed to their crimes and accused others of crimes, and wives and relatives who inquired of those being tortured were themselves arrested and tortured even more severely.


Zhou involved in politics of Jiangxi soviet bases before moving there, interacted with Mao in capacity as CCP leader and spymaster

Mao was paranoid about KMT spies in his crew and Zhou agreed, Mao launced purge with torture and death

	
	Mao's attempts to purge the Red Army of those who might potentially oppose him led Mao to accuse Chen Yi, the commander and political commissar of the Jiangxi Military Region, as a counterrevolutionary, provoking a violent reaction against Mao's persecutions that became known as the "Futian Incident" in January 1931. Mao was eventually successful in subduing the Red Army, reducing its numbers from forty thousand to less than ten thousand. The campaign continued throughout 1930 and 1931. Historians estimate the total number who died due to Mao's persecution in all base areas to be approximately one hundred thousand.[99]


Mao accused commander Chen Yi of being counterevolutionary which led to "Futian Incident" (Zhou involved?) Mao killed about 100,000 people in this purge.

	
	The entire campaign occurred while Zhou was still in Shanghai. Although he had supported the elimination of counterrevolutionaries, Zhou actively suppressed the campaign when he arrived in Jiangxi in December 1931, criticizing the "excess, the panic, and the oversimplification" practiced by local officials. After investigating those accused of Anti-Bolshevism, and those persecuting them, Zhou submitted a report criticizing the campaign for focusing on the narrow persecution of anti-Maoists as anti-Bolshevists, exaggerating the threat to the Party, and condemning the use of torture as an investigative technique. Zhou's resolution was passed and adopted on 7 January 1932, and the campaign gradually subsided


Zhou criticized and "actively supressed" Mao's campaign, calling it excessive, and submited a resolution saying this which was accepted.

Early point of conflict between Zhou and Mao? this time, Zhou's line won.


	Zhou moved to the Jiangxi base area and shook up the propaganda-oriented approach to revolution by demanding that the armed forces under Communist control actually be used to expand the base, rather than just to control and defend it. In December 1931, Zhou replaced Mao Zedong as Secretary of the First Front Army with Xiang Ying, and made himself political commissar of the Red Army, in place of Mao. Liu Bocheng, Lin Biao and Peng Dehuai all criticized Mao's tactics at the October 1932 Ningdu Conference.[101][102]


this makes it sound like Zhou took power away from Mao?


	After moving to Jiangxi, Zhou met Mao for the first time since 1927, and began his long relationship with Mao as his superior. In the Ningdu conference, Mao was demoted to being a figurehead in the Soviet government. Zhou, who had come to appreciate Mao's strategies after the series of military failures waged by other Party leaders since 1927, defended Mao, but was unsuccessful. After achieving power, Mao later purged or demoted those who had opposed him in 1932, but remembered Zhou's defense of his policies.[103]


mao was demoted at Ningdu conference. Mao was first Zhou's superior but Zhou replaced him after that. Zhou is said to have defended Mao, something Mao appreciated later when purging his political opponents.

can guess some envy from Mao, sense of rivalry toward Zhou? Mao got humiliated then Zhou took command

Mao would come back to power in 1935: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zunyi_Conference


	
	...By the end of his lifetime, Zhou was widely viewed as representing moderation and justice in Chinese popular culture.[202] Since his death, Zhou Enlai has been regarded as a skilled negotiator, a master of policy implementation, a devoted revolutionary, and a pragmatic statesman with an unusual attentiveness to detail and nuance. 


If Zhou such a great spy/politician/diplomat, knew Mao for a long time, why did he do such a bad job trying to convince Mao not to start great Chinese famine?

better to look at: once it became clear famine was happening/imminent, how did Zhou go about trying to stop it?