https://www.deseretnews.com/article/62280/THE-WIRES-BRING-THE-WORLDS-NEWS-TO-NEWSPAPERS-AND-THEIR-READERS.html
	...Which wire service to use? Invariably on breaking stories about plane crashes, earthquakes or other tragedies, the news services do not agree on all the details. As editors we've come to expect it, though it does give us some anxious moments. The differences are understandable: Reporters are interviewing different people - hospital officials, police agencies, administrators - and of-ten their numbers don't add up. Most differences can be resolved simply by analyzing the story itself.

	One that leaps to mind involves last spring's Soviet submarine that surfaced off Norway with nuclear reactor trouble. Reading the three services it was easy to tell who had the best vantage: UPI was writing its story from Washington, based on Pentagon reports. AP was collecting information from its bureaus in London and Moscow. Reuters had a reporter/photographer aboard a rescue helicopter hovering overhead. We used Reuters.

	Other calls aren't so easy. Sometimes it requires a query to the local bureau, or, rarely, a call to the general news desks in New York.



newspapers.com search for April 6 got nothing, April 7 about 2-3 articles on it


AP, LA Times P.M final April 7:


https://www.newspapers.com/image/405372240/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine 
	Soviet Nuclear Submarine Reported Afire off Norway

	Casualties Believed on Board


interviewing anonymous GHW Bush officials

officials say sub accident, on fire in Nowegian Sea, casualties believed

	
	...The sources declined to say when or how the United States first became aware of the submarine's problems, but said it now appeared that Soviet ships and aircraft were being dispatched to the scene.

	The sources said the submarine climbed to the surface in a portion of the Norwegian Sea north of Norway. But the officials declined to say how far off the coastline the submarine was.

	The officials also said it remained unclear as to whether the crew was close to controlling the fires on board or whether the vessel was in any danger of sinking.


say Soviets on the way, won't say how far off coast, unclear if can control the fire and in danger of sinking

don't know Soviet name of sub

	
	"We don't know what caused the problem, but we think it's their only Mike and we know they've got some fires on board in the Norwegian Sea," one source said.

	"We also have reason to believe there have been some casualties."


maybe they did it?



https://www.newspapers.com/image/13374925/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine

another novel, doesn't say related in article


https://www.newspapers.com/image/272629715/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine

Honolulu Star-Bulletein recaps AP article more or less, doesn't cite AP



https://www.newspapers.com/image/285883096/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine

another timely article I guess


https://www.newspapers.com/image/343015784/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine

in the middle of talks for arms reduction deal with Gorbachev at the time--this have an impact?


different edits of apparently same AP article giving different connotations: Sitka Alaska printing without last two quotes sounds less ominous:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/11611196/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine


Fairbanks Alaska printing has more info, less ominous:

https://newspaperarchive.com/us/alaska/fairbanks/fairbanks-daily-news-miner/1989/04-07?tag=soviet+submarine&rtserp=tags/soviet-submarine?ndt=ex&pd=7&py=1989&pm=4&psb=relevance&search=ymd


only seeing in Alaska, Honolulu and P.M of LA Times on 7th, guess these are earliest timezones getting this and latest newspaper


...


April 8

Courier News Bridgewater New Jersey citing Washington Post:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/223409309
	Soviet sub sinks off Norway; 12 feared dead

	By The Washington Post


evacuated crew, sank

several crew believed killed, according to Pentagon and Norwegian officials


	...ABC News reported last night that Pentagon sources said as many as a dozen were killed in the fire, while others were rescued by sister Soviet ships that rushed to the scene.


last night: ABC: Pentagon: up to dozen killed in fire, Soviet ships rush and recue others

couldn't learn if radioactive material in sea, expert says new molten metal cooled reactor could be very dangerous


https://www.newspapers.com/image/223409426

on reactor:

	...We tried it once and gave up because we considered it too volatile. So if it was a reactor incident, it could be quite catastrophic.


Norwegian defense spokesman says saw two rubber dinghies, Soviet merchant ship and Soviet aircraft in the area

goes over Soviet sub failures in past

	
	...Johan Baali, director of Norway's State Radiation Technology Board, said a fire on board could damage a reactor sufficiently to cause radiactive leaks, Reuters reported from Oslo. "It's too early to say," he said, "but in such a case, it could be a substantial amount" of radiation.


followed by article "Soviet sub safety lags far behind U.S." by Richard Whittmire Gannet news service and "Hundreds have died in sub accidents" by AP



LA Time staff:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/405373402/
	Soviet Submarine Sinks off Norway

	Nuclear-Driven Craft Goes Down After Fire; 'Major Loss of Life' Reported

	By JOHN M. BRODER and MELISSA HEALY, Times Staff Writers

advanced sub caught fire, sunk, quote U.S. official "major loss of life"

	...At the Soviet Embassy in Oslo, a spokesman early today said the submarine sank but gave no other information, Reuters news agency reported, quoting the Norweigian news agency NTB.

	...Believed One of a Kind

	The accident involving the submarine, believed to be the only one of its kind, may provide an intelligence bonanza for the United States and its allies if reconnaisance ships, aircraft, or satellites were able to take detailed, close-up photographs of the rare craft as it surfaced.

	The Norwegian Defense Minister said that Soviet ships and aircraft were in the area where the sub was lost, in international waters off Spitsbergen Island near the Arctic Circle.

	The statement said Norwegian military aircraft had flown over the area, about 300 miles from North Cape on the Norwegian mainland, and had seen the submarine ablaze. Officials said the fire appeared to be concentrated in the stern, or rear, of the vessel, where water distillation equipment and propulsion machinery are housed.


believed one of a kind, "intelligence bonanza" if U.S. and allies got pictures as it surfaced, Norwegian defence minister statement said Norwegian military aircraft flew over area and observed, Norwegian officials reported where fire located on craft

	
	..."We have observed bodies," Norwegian Defense Minister Johan Jorgen Holst told NTB. "We do not yet have an exact figure."

	In an interview broadcast on Britain's Independent Televsion News, Norwegian Defense Ministry spokesman COl. Gullow Gjeseth said that in a flight over the submarine, "I saw at the time two dinghies, with the personnell in one dinghy. We saw also a Soviet merchant ship in the area and we know also Soviet aircraft have been over the area."


norwegian defense personnel saw bodies, dunno how many, saw dinghies, saw Soviet merchant ship and aircraft, and told this to press

on tech of sub, designed for "cat and mouse game". "Special design," "unique propulsian system," double-hulled titanium, carry up to 6 nuke torpedoes


	...White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said U.S. officials had little information on the incident Friday night.

	"There are indications there was a major fire aboard, but we have no details. We understand there has been a loss of life but we can't confirm how many," Fitzwater said. "We express the sympathy of the United States government to the Soviet government for any loss of life involved." President Bush had been notified of the accident, Fitzwater said.

	The area of the sinking in the Norwegian Sea is the site of many naval exercises by both Eastern and Western forces and is considered a potential battleground in the event of a large-scale conflict. Western forces practice keeping Soviet submarines away from Atlantic shipping lanes, while Soviet vessels patrol there to keep track of Western ships.

	One analyst said that before sinking, the submarine could have released its ballast, causing the ship to pop up high on the surface of the ocean, exposing some of the sub's underside.

	"This really could be an intelligence coup," said one American naval analyst. When a disabled Soviet Victor-class submarine surfaced off Newport, R.I., in the mid-1980's, analysts reaped a harvest of valuable intelligence.

	But the accident poses potentialy severe environment hazards as well. Previous submarine accidents have resulted in release of radiation, and in 1961 members of a Soviet submarine crew died of radiation poisoning after an accident in the Baltic, according to recently declassified CIA documents.


makes it sound like CIA did it to get intelligence

goes on with experts "maybe radiation won't be that bad"

end quote Navy Secretary saying evidence Soviet safety standards are bad


Associated Press in Courier Journal Louisville, KY:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/109962303
	Nuclear-powred Soviet sub apparently sinks near Norway

	By NORMAN BLACK
	Associated Press

	WASHINGTON -- A nuclear-powered Soviet submarine appears to have sunk more than 300 miles off the coast of Norway after suffering an underwater accident and catching fire, U.S. and Norwegian officials said yesterday.

	U.S. officials said there "definitely" were casualties on board the submarine, but they declined to estimate how many.

	They said that the submarine managed to surface for a time after the accident in the Norwegian Sea, and that at least one Soviet ship had responded to a distress call and arrived on the scene.

	"It was on the surface, but now it appears it's gone," one official said on condition of anonymity. "We're trying to get confirmation, but we believe it sank."


quoting a bunch of anonymous officials who won't even say for sure it sank

"it was on the surface, but now it appears it's gone"

goes on to quote Fitzwater sympathy for "any loss of life involved"


one U.S. source gives last known location

another says dunno what caused it

quotes "nuclear specialist" saying reactor "inherently very dangerous"


	...Col. Gollow Gjeseth, press spokesman of Norway's Subpreme Defense Command, said in a telephne interview that a Norwegian observation plane sent over the area saw "a Soviet ship and two rubber boats."

	...The agency said people had been sighted in at least one of the rubber boats, but it was not clear if the boats were from the submarine or from one of the surface vessels.


not meantioning saw bodies as in LA times article? WH spokesman and officials quotes strange given this, "sorry for any loss of life involved"

us sources say no U.S. ships in area or request from Soviets for assistance

goes over "Mike class", unique, some prior Soviet sub accidents

	
	...Jan Bremer, author of the recently published book "Soviet Submarines," says the high accident rate can be traced to poor construction and design, poor maintenance mthods and insufficient training.


goes on about crew training

	
	...Another factor is the dangerous liquid fuel the Soviets use to power their submarine-based missiles. U.S. missile submarines use solid-fuel rockets.


implying the fuel was source of fire?

something similar came up with U.S. vs NK missile program, some journalists writing as if U.S. blowing up rockets and fuel mentioned iirc

	
	Evidence of poor submarine construction on Soviet submarines was uncovered in 194 when the CIA-operated Glomar Explorer succeeded in raising on section of a sunken Golf II submarine.


trying to rub it in? Glomar Explorer was sore-point to Soviets

	
	"Hull thickness varied widely, and welds were uneven and dangerously pitted," Bremer wrote. "Most surprising was the use of four-by-two wooden beams for internal structural support."

	U.S. Defense Department officials have long asserted that the Russian navy does not attach as much importance to the safety of its nuclear operations as do Western navies.


why write this in article on Soviet sailors who just died?

quotes Arikin again "inherently very dangerous", ends with if reactor "could be quite catastrophic."



the guardian:
https://www.newspapers.com/image/260150240/
	The Norwegian Defence Minister, Mr Johan Joergen Holst, said today: "There is reason to believe the boat has sunk. We know it was nuclear-powered and probably had nuclear weapons on board."

	...Norwar, a Nato member, would be seeking information from the Soviet authorities. There was no comment from Moscow.


"FLORIDA TODAY wires":
https://www.newspapers.com/image/177596522/
	The Soviet Embassy confirmed that a nuclear-powered submarine sank in international waters in the Norwegian Sea, according to a radio report early today.

ENQUIRER NEWS services:
https://www.newspapers.com/image/101978745/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	A Norwegian military officer said his government believes the submarine has sunk.

"wire service reports:"
https://www.newspapers.com/image/258616353/
	A US official monitoring the incident said the vessel surfaced briefly, then sank.

Tennessean News Services:
https://www.newspapers.com/image/112991368
	Holst said he believes the submarine broke in two as it sank and that the Soviets turned down Norwegian offers of help.
	
Advertiser News Services:
https://www.newspapers.com/image/263358419/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	A high-speed Soviet nuclear attack submarine caught fire while patrolling 300 miles off the northern Norwegian coast yesterday and sank after surfacing long enough to evacuate its crew.

https://www.newspapers.com/image/109962303
	Nuclear-powred Soviet sub apparently sinks near Norway

	..."It was on the surface, but now it appears it's gone," one official said on condition of anonymity. "We're trying to get confirmation, but we believe it sank."



Detroit Free Press Washington Staff:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/99955374/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	Soviet sub burns, sinks near Norway

	...A large nuclear powered Soviet submarine caught fire and sank in an underwater accident in the Norwegian Sea and a dozen crewmen were feared dead.

	A Soviet embassy spokesman in Oslo confirmed Friday's sinking but gave no other information, the Norwegian news agency NTB reported today.

	U.S. officials said they did not know when the accident occured or if either of the vessel's nuclear reactors were involved. Soviet ships and aircraft were dispatched to the area, about 310 miles north of North Cape in Norway.


why couldn't AP include spokespan confirming ship sunk?

	
	ABC News reported Friday, quoting unnamed Pentagon sources, that as many as a dozen people were killed in the fire, while others were rescued by Soviet ships. The submarine is believed to carry a crew of 95, according to the reference book "Jane's Fighting Ships."


or include previous night APC report that up to a dozen killed in the fire?

Navy officials say reactors dangerous

Fitzwater saying fire aboard, no details, understand loss of life dunno how many

	
	..."We express the sympathy of the United States government to the Soviet government for any loss of life involved," he said, adding that President George Bush had been informed of the accident.

	"We have observed bodies," Norwegian Defense Minister Johan Joergen Holst told NTB, "We do not yet have an exact figure."

	Holst added, "We know it was nuclear-powered and probably had nuclear weapons on board. ...It is clearly a very serious accident."


goes over region with Soviet patrols, some info on Mike class

previous studies say U.S. navy subs don't leak too much when sunk, unkown "to what degree the Soviets employ such measures."

Returned to sunken U.S. sub sites and found no evidence of release of radioactivity


says AP , NY Times and Reuters contributed to report

DFP still combining wires

article a lot better than LA Times and AP

don't come off as assholes



another reprinting of AP article in Longview News Journal Longview, Texas:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/215929857/
	Soviet nuclear sub sinks

	Fire strikes vessel off Norway; deaths reported

	WASHINGTON (AP) -- A nuclear-powered Soviet submarine appears to have sunk more than 300 miles off the coast of Norway after suffering an underwater accident and catching fire, U.S. and Norwegian officials said Friday.

	U.S. officials said there were "definitely" casualties on board the stricken submarine, but declined to estimate how many.

	ABC News reported Friday night that Pentagon sources said as many as a dozen were killed in the fire, while others were rescued by sister Soviet ships that rushed to the scene. The submarine is believed to carry a crew of 95, according to the authoratative reference book, "Jane's Fighting Ships."


paragraph on ABC report is from AP article...


	..."It was on the surface, but now it appears it's gone," said one official, speaking on condition of anonymity. "We're trying to get confirmation, but we believe it sunk."


goes on with much of same paragraphs from Courier Journal printing, adds:

	
	...The sources declined to say when or how the United States first became aware of the submarine's problems.

	But ABC News reported that Pentagon sources said U.S. intelligence learned of the accident through electronic intercepts of communications from the stricken submarine.


unlike Courier Journal printing, omits the many paragraphs on soviet sub failures, "poor construction" at end


another printing of AP article includes that Soviet embassy confirmed it sunk: https://www.newspapers.com/image/267185375/ , either came later or weird editing by Courier Journal

paragraphs on 2x4 beams, Glomar explorer, show up in Whittmire "shoddy construction" article:
https://www.newspapers.com/image/137307388/?terms=surprising%2Bwooden%2Bbeams
	Evidence of poor submarine construction on Soviet submarines was uncovered in 194 when the CIA-operated Glomar Explorer succeeded in raising on section of a sunken Golf II submarine.

https://www.newspapers.com/image/257343730


AP from Oslo, Norway (above AP from Washington) in Ithica Journal:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/257343730
	Soviet sub burns, sinks off Norway

	OSLO, Norway (AP) -- Soviet ships and planes circled in the Arctic twilight Friday at the site where a nuclear submarine was believed to have sunk, and Norway's defense minister said there was reason to believe crew members had been rescued.

	Defense Minister Johan Joergen Holst made the comment on Norwegian Radio. He did not elaborate.

	The West German government radio also quoted Holst as saying pilots of reconnaissance planes reported seeing bodies at the site. He was quoted as saying he believed the submarine broke in two as it sank and that the Soviets turned down Norwegian offers of help.

	U.S. officials said there "definitely" were casualties aboard, but declined to estimate how many.


why did Holst say different things to different radio stations


recon plane, boats with rubber dinghies with people in them, "it was not clear whether the people were from the submarine or the surface vessels."

	
	..."With the observations we have made with the Soviet vessels and planes in the area, it seems the Soviets can handle this case alone," Holst said on Norwegian radio.


goes on about area, facts about "Mike," quotes expert Johan Baarli saying radiation probably won't be big problem


article is by Doug Mellgren, this printing in Muncie Evening Press has more info:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/250949056/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine

	...Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sent messages to the prime ministers of Norway and Britain saying that an undetermined number of sailors died in the accident Friday and that the nuclear reactors on the submarine had been shut down before the vessel sank, officials and news reports said.

	...Vadime Rosanov, the Soviet press attache in Oslo, told Norwegian television the sub was carrying torpedoes, not ballistic missiles. However, he declined to say whether the vessel was equipped with nuclear weapons.

	U.S. and Nowegian military sources, who reported the accident before Soviet officials did, said the fire apparently broke out while the vessel was underwater and that it surfaced before sinking.

	...Tass, which did not identify the submarine, said only that "a fire broke out on board a Soviet nuclear-powered torpedo submarine"

	..."Specialists ruled out the possibility of a radioactive contamination of the environment," Tass said. A duty officer at the Soviet Defense Ministry in Moscow said that he had no information on the accident.


taking a page from Chernobyl reporting?

think for some soviets telling you "the possibility of radioactive contimination has been ruled out" translates to "run"

wonder if this caused people to freak out afterward




...


most articles in newspaper search are the Washington AP by Norman Black

couldn't find anything attributed to reuters in search, some say "reuters contributed to this report


found one using UPI:


New Castle News, PA:

https://newspaperarchive.com/us/pennsylvania/new-castle/new-castle-news/1989/04-08?tag=soviet+submarine+upi&rtserp=tags/soviet-submarine-upi?ndt=ex&pd=8&py=1989&pm=4&psb=relevance&search=ymd
	Soviet sub sinking kills 12

	OSLO, Norway (UPI)--A Soviet nuclear-powered attack submarine caught fire and sank in the Norwegian Sea, killing at least 12 crew members, and Soviet President Mikhail Gorachev said today there was no risk of a radiation leak, officials said.

	In a message to British Prime Minister Margaret Tatcher and relayed through aides early today, Gorbachev assured her that "the assessmet of a risk of an explosion or a leak was negligible," a spokeswoman for Thatcher said.

	"What he really wanted to do was reassure her about the nuclear sub accident. He reported where it had occurred, and there had been loss of life," the spokeswoman said.


word "reassure" next to "nuclear sub accident" usually doesn't reassure people...

quotes "Norwegian and Soviet authorities" saying it sank, some killed, some rescued

quotes Tass on fire broke out, soviet vessels rescued some crew

mentions Gjeseth statement

UPI says soviet disclosure prompt, but Norwegian foreign minister criticized as slow

ends saying maybe carried nuclear arms



...


maybe not good example


almost all use AP, then some LA Times, NY Times


Deseret news says decided on reuters, could compare but gap in archives for exactly these dates:

https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=Aul-kAQHnToC



https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1989/04/08/446189.html?pageNumber=1

NY Times article by Richard Halloran


...


two different printings of same wire can give very different connotations:

LA Times and Fairbanks printing of April 7 AP article

Courier Journal and Longview News Journal of April 8 AP article


...

April 9

Reuters South Florida Sentinal, pg 12

https://www.newspapers.com/image/238167693/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine%2Breuters
	60 feared dead in fire, sinking of Soviet sub

	Reuters

	OSLO, Norway -- At least 60 Soviet sailors are feared dead after their nuclear-powered submarine caught fire, exploded and sank in the Arctic, Norwegian television reported on Saturday.

	It quoted Norway's Defense Ministry for the death toll more than 23 hours after the submarine went down about 100 miles south of Bear Island deep inside the Arctic Circle.

	"There is much to indicate that the number of dead was higher than first thought, although we do not have an exact figure, Defense Ministry spokesman Erik Senstad said."

	Earlier Western estimates put the number of known dead at 12 and about 50 missing.


earlier reports quoted the official on ABC news and said "12 reported dead", some reports said "Holst said the crew was rescued"


	...Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev said the submarine's nuclear reactor was shut down before it sank.

	The submarine would normally carry a crew of 95 and a Nowegian Defense Ministry statement said it seemed that between 40 and 50 crew members appeared to have escaped before it sank in 5,000 feet of water.

	"How many of those survived injuries and exposure to the cold water is uncertain," the statement said.

	The ministry said a Norwegian air force observation plane had spotted the men clinging to rafts.


crew shut down reactor before it sank, 40 or 50 escaped, many might have died from exposure to cold water

front page doesn't have reference to story


Tallahassee Democrat "Final Edition", AP, pg 1:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/247245655/
	No radiation found

	Prelliminary tests show no leak from downed sub

	OSLO, Norway -- Preliminary laboratory tests showed nothing to indicate that a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine released radiation after it caught fire and sank, Nowegian scientists said today.

	...no radiation from the sub, the government's Insitute for Radiation protection said in a statement.

	...tests checked to see if the Soviet sub released radiation

	...tests will continue

	...research vessel will take new samples

	...As many as 50 crew members may have died, officials said.

	Defense Minister Johan Jeorgen Holst said the risk of radiation contamination was slight.

	Soviet officials said there was no danger of contamination. They confirmed there were deaths, but did not provide casualty figures or details about the explosion, the third serious Soviet sub accident in two-and-a-half years.

	...capable of carrying more than a dozen long-range missiles

	...declined to say whether ... equipped with any nuclear weapons

	...estimated 40 to 50 men were picked up by Soviet vessels, but it was unclear if all survived.


why make it about radiation tests if big news was how many died?


"Regional edition" printed AP story differently:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/247245295/
	Sub toll may reach 50

	At least 40 are rescued among Soviet ship's 95-member crew

		50 Soviet sailors new feared dead

	OSLO, Norway (AP) -- Norway yesterday searched for signs of radioactivity from a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine that caught fire and sank of the coast. Authorities feared about 50 Soviet sailors died.


different headline, opens with same paragraphs about radiation contamination

replaced some paragraphs on contamination with some on the accident, how many died


New Jersey Home News prints AP story, pg 6:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/317972014/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	50 Soviet sailors new feared dead

	OSLO, Norway (AP) -- Norway yesterday searched for signs of radioactivity from a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine that caught fire and sank of the coast. Authorities feared about 50 Soviet sailors died.

	Norway said an explosion occurred aboard the sub before it sank Friday. Moscow said there was no danger of contamination and confirmed there were deaths but did not immediately provide causality figures or details on how the accident occurred.


it's like every paragraph in AP story that has information on casualties from sub has bit about the contamination story too and puts that first


	...From observations by a Nowegian reconnaissance air crew, the Norwegian Defense Ministry estimated 40 to 50 men were picked up by Soviet vessels, and it was unclear if all survived.

	"It's a matter of mathematics," said Maj. John Berg, a military spokesman. "You have a potential of 50 or more" who died.


why can't just say "60 feared dead" like reuters?

goes on about collecting samples, radiation risk, criticizing Soviet gov for not giving info sooner

next article is "Soviets told Bush soon after nuke sub sank" about Gorbachev's message to state dep and Bush Friday night (April 7)


	...He said Soviet Ambassador Yuri Dubinin called the State Departent Friday night with the message for Bush from Gorbachev.

	"Ambassador Dubinin relayed that the submarine had sunk, that there were a number of casualties but that the possibility of an explosion and radioactivity is excluded and that search and rescue continues," Popadiuk said.


why couldn't officials interviewed by AP just say that?

apparently all they told AP was "we're trying to get confirmation" if it sunk, were "definitely" casualties

implication being they didn't believe Gorbachev, tried to check, "definitely" casualties but need "confirmation" if it sunk

guess did not relay Gorbachev's statement to AP, though his messages to other govs leaked later on 9th


Atlanta Constitution from "wire reports," pg 3:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/400159424/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	Tests Indicate No Radiation Leaking From Sunken Soviet Submarine

	Officials Fear 50 Died in Accident Off Norway Coast

	From Wire Reports

	OSLO, Norway -- Preliminary laboratory tests showed nothing to indicate that a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine released radiation after it caught fire and sank, Norwegian scientists said today.

	Authorities feared that about 50 Soviet sailors were dead.



Philly Inquirer similar, attributes AP article to Arthur Max, says UPI contributed to article: https://www.newspapers.com/image/176639552

Paris News, Texas on pg 7 had it titled "Norway checks for radiation from sub:"

https://www.newspapers.com/image/13496369/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	Norway checks for radiation from sub

	Soviets say no danger of nuclear contamination

	OSLO, Norway (AP) -- Norway yesterday searched for signs of radioactivity from a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine that caught fire and sank of the coast. Authorities feared about 50 Soviet sailors died.

	Norway said an explosion occurred aboard the sub before it sank Friday. Moscow said there was no danger of contamination and confirmed there were deaths but did not immediately provide causality figures or details on how the accident occurred.


Albuquerque Journal prints "Sub Tests Indicate No Radiation Leak"

https://www.newspapers.com/image/157607282/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	Sub Tests Indicate No Radiation Leak

	Fifty Feared Dead in Sinking Off Norway

	THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

	OSLO, Norway -- Preliminary laboratory tests showed nothing to indicate that a nuclear-powered Soviet submarine released radiation after it caught fire and sank, Norwegian scientists said today.

	Early results of tests for radioactive contamination in air and surface water samples from the accident area showed no radiation from the sub, the government's Institute for Radiation protection said in a statement.


then news on 50 dead 4 paragraphs in

did AP have two different articles? both had problem of combing "no radiation" and "50 sailors dead" news, letting the radiation story dominate, with one worse than the other


maybe it's a joke by psycopaths? like they're proud of chernobyl and want to assure themselves that fretting public cares more about nuclear radiation possibility than 50 dead 



LA Times, LA Times staff writers, pg 1:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/405378057/
	Soviet Nuclear Sub Sinks Off Norway; Casualties Feared

	By JOHN M. BRODER and MELISSA HEALY, Times Staff Writers

	WASHINTGON -- An advanced Soviet attack submarine caught fire and sank in the Nrwegian Sea Friday, according to U.S. and Norwegian government sources.

	The nuclear-powered "Mike"-class submarine suffered a catastrophic accident involving "major loss of life," according to a U.S. government official who asked not to be identified.

	...An American official monitoring reports on the incident said the vessel surfaced briefly, then sank.



it's the same as April 8 article...


https://www.newspapers.com/image/405373402/
	BY JOHN. M. BRODER and MELISSA HEALY

	...An advanced Soviet attack submarine caught fire and sank in the Norwegian Sea on Friday, U.S. and Norwegian government sources reported. A Soviet official in Oslo confirmed it had sunk.

	The nuclear-powered Mike-class submarine, which can carry a crew of 95, suffered a catastrophic accident involving "major loss of life," one U.S. government official said. An American mointoring reports on the incident said the vessel surfaced briefly, then sank.


April 9th article:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/405378057/
	...then sank.

	Intelligence Bonanza

	The accident involving the submarine, believed to be the only one of its kind, may provide an intelligence bonanza for the United States and its allies...

	...White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said U.S. officials had little information on the incident Friday night.

	"There are indications there was a major fire aboard, but we have no details. We understand there has been a loss of life but we can't confirm how many," Fitzwater said. "We express the sympathy of the United States goverment to the Soviet government for any loss of life involved."

	...potential battle-ground in a future large-scale conflict

	...Could be Hazardous

	..."Really could be an intelligence coup"

	...But the accident poses potentially severe environment hazards

	...in 1961 members of a Soviet submarine crew died of radiation poisoining ... according to recently declassified CIA documents.


it's almost same article


this is either alternate edition of April 9th LA Times or earlier edition

"Sunday Final" has the new story:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/405378494/
	No Sub Radiation Peril, Soviets Say

	Gorbachev Reassures World Leaders; More than 60 Feared Lost in Sinking

	By WILLIAM TUOHY and MICHAEL PARKS, Times Staff Writers

	OSLO--Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sought to assure the world Saturday that no Chernobyl-like disaster looms in Arctic waters and observers here said the fiery accident that sank an advanced nuclear-powered submarine Friday claimed many more lives than initially believed.

	After battling fire, explosion and the icy Norwegian Sea, more than 60 Soviet submariners are now feared dead as a result of the catastrophe that touched off international concerns of radioactive dangers.

	"There is much to indicate that the number of dead was higher than first thought--though we do not have an exact figure," Norway's Defense Ministry spokesman Erik Senstad said. Earlier reports placed the number of deaths at 12, with many missing and an un-

	--------
	-EXPERTS FEAR LEAK
	U.S. experts fear the Soviet sub could be dangerous. Page 11.
	--------

	known number rescued by Soviet ships responding to distress signals.


LA Times combines stories, adds to radiation fears and takes it further by hinting that submariner deaths could have been from radiation


	Gorbachev relayed statements to the President Bush and other world leaders offering assurances that no nuclear disaster is in store in Arctic waters--in part because the crew shut off the submarine's nuclear reactors before abandoning the vessel.


How about this for headline: Soviet submariners heroes, 60 die as shut off nuclear reactors before sinking ?

LA Times and other sources put this words of Gorbachev and left at that, which would probably make readers of Western newspapers suspicious instead of "assured," especially after Chernobyl

think the authors know that...


	"The possibility of a nuclear explosion and radioactive pollution of the environment is excluded, according to the opinion of experts," Gorbachev said in one such telegram to the NOrwegian government.

	Nevertheless, Norway dispatched ships and helicopters to collect water and air samples to be tested in Oslo for possible radioactvity.

	Norwegian scientists reported early today that preliminary tests indicated little chance of radioactive contamination of the air.

	...U.S. authorities said the possibility of widespread contamination is slight.

	...If Norway's statements prove correction, about two-thirds of the submarine's 95-member crew were killed in the drama that began when a fire broke out abaout 11:41 a.m., local time

	...According to some unofficial reports in the Soviet Union, the crew may have scuttled the vessel themselves after battling the fire for more than five hours.

	Later, some crew members were spotted by Norwegian air force observers in overloaded life rafts. Some men were clinging to the sides, immersied in the icy waters. Norwegian television showed a photograph of a raft, packed with crew members.


ends with Soviet craft circling site, lay claim, unlikely U.S. will be able to salvage wreckage

https://www.newspapers.com/image/405378737

the pg 11 article says the sodium in reactor may react with water and create a radioactive bubble that reaches surface


Chicago Tribune on sub pg 1:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/389275573/
	1st test finds no leak of radiation from sub

	By Thom Shanker

	Chicago Tribune

	WASHINGTON--Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev assured the governments of the United States and Norway Saturday that the nuclear-powered submarine that caught fire and sank in Arctic waters poses no threat of radioactive pollution.

	And initial tests of water samples taken by the Norwegian navy in the area of the accident showed no sign of radiation leaks, according to Norwegian officials, who also said about 50 sailors are believed to have died in the accident.

	Gorbacheve asserted in a message to Norwegian Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland, "according to the opinion of experts, the possiiblity of a nuclear explosion and radioactive pollution of the environment is excluded."

	Similar assurance were passed along to President Bush By Soviet Ambassador Yuri Dubinin, the White House said.


didn't have a story on 60 dead


Arizona republic, "republic wire services" citing contributing AP and UPI:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/122142493/
	Sunken sub is no danger, Soviets say

	Nuclear-craft death figure rises to 60


KY Courier-Journal reprints LA Times: https://www.newspapers.com/image/109963061/?terms=soviet+submarine


Detroit Free Press:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/99955854/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	Soviets say sub won't leak radiation; 60 reported dead

	By Erland Lyngve
	United Press International

	OSLO, Norway--The Soviet Union has assured Western leaders there is no danger of a radiation leak from a nuclear-powered submarine that caught fire and sank in an accident Norway estimates killed about 60 sailors.

	The Norwegian Defense Command said 40 or 50 of the crew members on the advanced attack submarine escaped after the vessel caught fire Friday on the Norwegian Sea, but some died later of their injuries.

	The statement said the estimate of 60 deaths was based on airborne observations of the rescue effort at the site about 300 miles off the Norwegian coast.

	Norwegian ships and aircraft were ordered to test water and air for radiation, despite Soviet assurances the titanium-hulled, Mike-class sub's nuclear reactor had been turned off and that there was no danger of contamination.

	"We know for sure that the nuclear reactor is shut down," Soviet Defense Minister Dmitry Yazov was quoted as saying by the Soviet newspaper Izvestia. "In the opinion of competent services, a radioactive contamination of the environment is ruled out."

	...Despite the assurances, Norwegian officials requested all Norwegian ships in the area to take water samples, and aircraft were to be sent over the area to measures for radiation in the air, officials said Saturday.

	A Norwegian radiation specialist said the likelihood of radiation escaping from the vessel was minimal.

	...Soviet officials confirmed there were deaths in the accident, but gave no details.

	A reporter for the Soviet military newspaper Red Star said the submarine's crew scuttled the craft and it sank a mile to the ocean floor after a fruitless five-hour battle to extinguish the fire Friday.

	"The water out there was cold, the sea choppy and it was windy," the journalist said in a telephone interview. "The fire broke out when the sub was returning from a long mission. The crew tried for five hours to extinguish the flames but to no avail."

	"There should be no danger of radioactivity because the crew shut down the reactor and the sank the sub themselves."

	The Red Star journalist said he did not know whether the captain of the submarine, who he identified as Yevgeny Vanin, survived.


UPI story mostly about radiation fears, DFP includes details on what crew did on page 10 half of story

another UPI printing here: https://newspaperarchive.com/us/florida/key-west/key-west-citizen/1989/04-09/page-19/soviet-submarine-upi?ndt=ex&pd=9&py=1989&pm=4&psb=relevance&search=ymd

https://www.newspapers.com/image/423524987/?terms=submarine

Gazzette makes article about "urgent" radiation tests, has a sentance at end on Nowegian death toll report after blaming Soviets for not telling casualties. 


...


In newspaper search, almost all printed story with the radiation fears, i.e. Norwegian tests or Soviet denials, as main story, with the 60 sailors dead as secondary story or only a few sentences.


only the reuters story made that front and center, and put into context of previously reporting 12 casualties

Florida Sentinal,

St Louis Post-Dispatch: https://www.newspapers.com/image/139662252/?terms=submarine


The Observer: https://www.newspapers.com/image/259008342/?terms=At%2Bleast%2B60%2BSoviet%2Bsailors%2Bare%2Bfeared%2Bdead


and that's all that could find


NY Times, said to be looked to by other journalists to "decide what's newsworthy":

pg 1:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1989/04/09/713189.html?pageNumber=1
	News Summary

	...Sub Sinking is Confirmed

	The Soviet Union confirmed the fire and fatalities on a nuclear-powered submarine that sank in the Norwegian Sea Friday, but said there was no danger of contamination. Page 20.


pg 20:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1989/04/09/685489.html?pageNumber=20
	Moscow Confirms Blaze and Deaths Aboard Lost Nuclear Sub

	By FRANCIS X. CLINES

	Special to The New York Times

	MOSCOW, APril 8--The Soviet Government today confirmed the fire and fatalities aboard a nuclear-powered submarine that sank at sea Friday, but insisted that there was no danger of nuclear contamination of the environment.

	"We know for sure that the nuclear reactor is shut down," the Defense Minister, Dmitri T. Yazov said in an interview in the Government newspaper Izvestia. "In the opinion of competent sources, a radioactive contamination of the environment is ruled out."

	The submarine, said by American and Norwegian specialists to be armed with nuclear-tipped cruise missiles, disappeared in the Norwegian Sea in international waters 270 miles north of Norway's northern cape.

	Soviet officials did not say how many of the 95 crew members died, but Western officials who monitored Soviet naval radio report the death toll may have been 11 or 12.



how did the fact that 60 sailors died in a world-wide publicized accident not make it to the New York Times?


...


from reports so far:


experimental sub on fire, might have nuclear weapons on board

surfaces, fight fire for hours

some crewmen in dinghies

Norwegian aircraft fly overhead

eventually, crew (maybe) decides to scuttle ship after shutting down reactor

soviet ships take some time to get there, see some crew in frigid water

western news sources are reporting at first 12 dead

next day, turns out 60 dead, but news inexplicably shifting focus to radiation fears, putting figures burried in article, couhing in "soviets won't tell us," or in NY Times case not reporting at all


but it's weird so many died--the Norwegian aircraft were right there, already got pictures of craft, Soviets wouldn't care if got close enough to rescue, yet Noreweigan gov says Soviets refused rescue

Soviet ships take time to get there, meanwhile some report shipped scuttled when they could have waited on sub for rescue ships instead of in frigid water, where many were reported to have died or died from later

the press ended up downplaying a story not only important, hurts U.S-Soviet relations to dismiss, but perplexing, suggesting something more going on here


what happened on the submarine? how did crewmen die?


...


according to CIA:

https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/95unclass/Montgomery.html
	It is 7 April 1989. Komsomolets, of the Soviet Northern Fleet, is cruising at 1,250 feet below the surface of the Norwegian Sea, some 100 miles southwest of Bjornoya (Bear Island) and 200 miles to the north of the Norwegian mainland. She has been on patrol for 39 days.

	At 11:00 a.m. Seaman Nodari Bukhnikashvili reports all well in Compartment 7, the location of steering and the aftmost space on the ship. Moments later, a high-pressure air line connecting to main ballast tanks allowing the submarine to control its depth bursts its seal in the seventh compartment. Somehow a spray of oil hits a hot surface there, and a flash fire begins in the high pressure oxygen-rich air. Three minutes later Capt. Third Rank Vyacheslav Yudin, Komsomolets' watch engineer in the control room, notes a sharp rise in temperature aft. He calls Bukhnikashvili on the intercom, but receives no reply. Lt. Igor Molchanov notes the time in the deck log.

	Chief Engineer Valentin Babenko and Commanding Officer Captain First Rank Yevgeniy Vanin are now in the control room. Babenko recommends Vanin smother the apparent fire with freon, a nonflammable gas. Vanin delays, knowing the gas would smother the seaman as well as the fire. But soon he reluctantly orders the system activated. The high-pressure air line is feeding the fire in Compartment 7 like a blast furnace. Bukhnikashvili is the first of the crew to die. The fire is now beyond containment.

	Pressure aft forces oil into Compartment 6, and the fire arcs through cableways despite closed hatches. Turbine generators here wind down, the emergency system to protect the nuclear reactors from overload kicks in, and the propeller shaft stops. Fearing a meltdown, the reactor officer shuts down the submarine's main source of power. Now Komsomolets is powerless. With no way on and at a depth of 500 feet, she loses vital lift. Interior communications cut off. At 11:13 a.m. oil pumps shut down and the sub loses hydraulic pressure to control surfaces. The vertical rudder jams, and the stern diving planes cannot be controlled. Captain Vanin orders the main ballast tanks blown, and Komsomolets rises to nearly 300 feet. Here he repeats the procedure. Somehow, by blowing extra water ballast, Vanin manages to bring the sub to the surface. As she founders, he signals an encoded SOS to his headquarters.


CIA: high-pressure air line to main ballast tank bursts, "somehow a spray of oil hits a hot surface" and flash fire starts.

Captain 3rd rank Yudin notes temp rise there 3 minutes later, gets no reply. Babenko reccomends to Captain 1st Vanin to smother with freon. Vanin delays knowing the gas would smother the seaman as well as the fire (is this true?) but eventually reluctantly orders the system activated.

The high pressure airline was feeding the fire like a furnace by then, beyond containment, Bukhnikashvili dead

fire starts spreading through cableways despite closed hatches. Emergency overload protection kicks in, not turbine, reactor officer shuts down reactor fearing meltdown. powerless at 500 ft depth

13 minutes into fire, lose hydraulic pressure to rudders. Capt Vanin orders ballast tanks blown, rises to 300 feet, repeats, "somehow, by blowing extra water ballast, Vanin manages to bring the sub to the surface." Sends SOS.


	But surfacing has not put Komsomolets out of danger. By 11:21 a.m., the fire has spread through cableways to all aft compartments and has reached nearly 2,000° F. The rubber coating on the outer hull designed to muffle acoustic detection begins to slide off in strips.

	Vanin orders all hands not engaged in damage control topside. Those fighting to save the ship don masks using the emergency breathing system. But with the loss of high-pressure air, fumes from Compartment 7 have brought carbon monoxide (CO), a tasteless, odorless, and toxic gas, into the system. Men get dizzy and doctor Lt. Leonid Zayats suspects something wrong. He rips off his mask and tests the air. A fatal concentration of CO is detected. Now most of the crew will fight for their ship in a swelter of smoke and foul air.

	Vanin continues signaling Northern Fleet Headquarters. By 11:41 a.m. his message is received, but garbled--a Soviet submarine somewhere is in trouble, and air crews are alerted.

	By noon the fire reaches forward compartments. Nothing is heard from the nine crewmen manning the reactors in Compartment 4. Yudin and another officer don self-contained breathing gear, open the hatch, and enter. Miraculously, they find two officers still alive in the smoke-filled compartment and bring them out. More rescuers try to ventilate Compartment 5 and bring out two crewmen. One survives. In Compartment 3 Seaman Roman Filippov tries to restart a diesel generator to provide ship's power. He succeeds but becomes ill and is ordered topside. Capt. Third Rank Anatoliy Ispenkov takes over and continues to man the post.


21 minutes in, fire spread through caleways to all aft compartments, reached 2000 degress F, rubber coating on outer hull starts to slide off.

Vanin orders all hands not in damage control topside. Get masks, some dizzy from CO. dr. Zayats takes off mask and detects fatal conenctration of CO. Crew has to fight for ship in smoke and deadly air

Vanin mesage recieved by 11:41 am, "garbled--a Soviet submarine somewhere is in trouble" (what does this mean?)

1 hour into fire reaches forward compartments. Don't hear from 9 crew fighting fire, Yudin and go in, find two officers still alive and rescue. Rescue one crewman. Roman Filippov tries to restart deisel engine to give ship power (could have taken to shore?) but becomes ill


	At 12:19 p.m. Vanin abandons security protocol and sends a message in the clear giving the submarine name, location, and dire circumstances. The Navy responds. Fleet Admiral Chernavin, the senior Soviet naval officer, is alerted while at a conference at the Defense Ministry. He orders his headquarters to take all steps to rescue the crew, including assistance from Norway. Fleet Headquarters finds three Soviet ships within 70 miles of Komsomolets and orders them to the scene. The first Red Banner Northern Fleet rescue aircraft takes off from the Kola Peninsula at 12:43 p.m. But M-12 amphibians are not dispatched, and no one alerts the Norwegians. Nonetheless, they know of the alert through intercepted communications, but delay sending help because it is unclear whether a practice rescue is under way.


80 minutes in, Vanin "abandons security protocal and sends a message in the clear" giving sub name, location, circumstances

apparently was sending encrypted SOS before, wasn't working?

this time navy responds (did air rescue do anything before?)

navy finds three ships within 70 miles of Komsololets, orders them there. Admiral Chernavin orders HQ to "take all steps to rescue the crew, including assistance from Norway"

so did Soviet gov ask for assistance from Norway or not?

Either Norwegian defense minister was lying, or Admiral Chernavin's orders were ignored

first rescue aircraft takes off 12:43 PM, 1 hour 43 minutes into fire.

CIA says no one alerts Norwegians, delay sending help "because it is unclear whether a practice resuce is under way" (?)

these are not reasons given by Norway gov, they said Soviets denied letting them rescue



https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/95unclass/Montgomery.html
	At 12:19 p.m. Vanin abandons security protocol and sends a message in the clear giving the submarine name, location, and dire circumstances. 

	...Fleet Admiral Chernavin, the senior Soviet naval officer ... orders his headquarters to take all steps to rescue the crew, including assistance from Norway. ...no one alerts the Norwegians. Nonetheless, they know of the alert through intercepted communications, but delay sending help


AP April 7, interviewing officials probably after intercepted Captains SOS:

https://newspaperarchive.com/us/alaska/fairbanks/fairbanks-daily-news-miner/1989/04-07?tag=soviet+submarine&rtserp=tags/soviet-submarine?ndt=ex&pd=7&py=1989&pm=4&psb=relevance&search=ymd
	The sources declined to say when or how the United States became aware of the submarine's problems

	...The officials also said it remained unclear as to whether the crew was close to controlling the fires on board or whether the vessel was in any danger of sinking.


Washington Post April 8:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/223409426/?terms=submarine
	"It is clearly a very serious accident," Norwegian Defense Minister Johan Holst said last night in Oslo, adding that NATO member Norway would be seeking information from Soviet authorities.

	...Both Norway and the United States routinely monitor radio communications in the gap, and apparently intercepted distress calls.


AP April 8:


https://www.newspapers.com/image/215929857/
	...The sources declined to say when or how the United States first became aware of the submarine's problems.

	But ABC News reported that Pentagon sources said U.S. intelligence learned of the accident through electronic intercepts of communications from the stricken submarine.


Ithica Journal April 8:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/257343730
	...Norway's defense minister said there was reason to believe crew members had been rescued.

	Defense Minister Johan Joergen Holst made the comment on Norwegian Radio. He did not elaborate.

	The West German government radio also quoted Holst as saying pilots of reconnaissance planes reported seeing bodies at the site.

	..."With the observations we have made with the Soviet vessels and planes in the area, it seems the Soviets can handle this case alone," Holst said on Norwegian radio.



Florida Today April 8:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/177596522/
	Holst ... said a Soviet cruiser was en route to the scene, and that Norwegian vessels had made no attempts to approach the site, 118 miles south-southwest of Norway's Bear Island and about 312 miles off the northern coast.


reported Guardian APril 8:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/260150240/
	Arne Finne, spokesman for northern Norway's main rescue centre in the town of Bodoe, said Norway had offered assistance to the Soviet Arctic port of Murmanks.


AP April 8:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/250949056/?terms=soviet%2Bsubmarine
	"The minimum number of casualties would be 12. It's difficult to say and we don't know how many were picked up," said Lt. Cmdr. Per Andre Ragdem, spokesman for Norway's northern military command.

	He said the Soviets had declined offers of help from Norway.


Norwegians and U.S. intecepted Captain Vanin breaking protocol to send SoS, no way they didn't know they were on their way down, would die in the water

meanwhile, U.S. officials tell press "unclear if close to controlling fires on board and in danger of sinking"

Holst tells Nowegian radio crew has been rescued, "seems Soviets can handle this one on their own", then tells German radio saw bodies

Admiral Chervin orders HQ to get assistance from Noway, CIA says nobody alerts Norway

Norway makes no attempt at rescue, Commander Ragdem tells press they offered assistance and Soviets declined

no way this happened without foul play--ignore urgent orders or ignore urgent request for help and lie about it


https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/95unclass/Montgomery.html
	At 2:20 p.m. the rescue aircraft radios Vanin and hears that the fire is not spreading. Most men assemble on the weather deck. At 2:40 p.m. the rescue aircraft breaks through the clouds and spots Komsomolets dead in the water. Visibility is fair, sea state moderate. The men are heartened by the sight of aircraft. Thinking that surface help will arrive soon, they do not don wet suits, although the water is cold enough at 36° F to kill them in 15 minutes. In a short time the wind begins to kick up, seas rise to 4 feet, and the men hang on to the slippery deck. For the next two hours everything seems under control. The crew clears Compartment 5, and the ship is not taking on water. Surface rescue is expected to arrive at 6:00 p.m. Most of the crew are now on the weather decks as the smoke inside the ship is becoming intolerable. In the control room visibility is less than 6 inches. Few now remain inside. Vanin, Yudin, and Molchanov in the control room, Ispenkov manning the generator, and Warrant Officers Slyusarenko, Krasnobayev, and Chernikov remain inside to save the ship.


Vanin tells rescue aircraft fire not spreading

rescue helocotper arrives 3 hours 20 minutes after fire, most men on deck

men think surface help will arrive soon, don't put on wet suits

water will kill in 15 minutes

everything seems good for next 2 hours, then wind picks up, sea rises

not taking on water, rescue ship expected at 6:00 PM

some crew remains inside to save the ship 


	For more than four hours Captain Vanin has been attempting to right his ship. Upon surfacing he corrects an initial port list by counterflooding. Two hours later a starboard list develops. Vanin is handicapped by damaged equipment, hazardous conditions, and a nearly complete lack of information from his instruments.

	About 4:30 p.m. Vanin orders two port ballast tanks blown to trim the sub. This does not work and serves only to accelerate taking on water. Komsomolets' after ballast tanks are not equipped with kingston valves that would close under water, and her pressure hull has been breached. She begins taking on water quickly astern. No damage control measures can save her now. At 4:42 p.m. Captain Vanin orders the crew to abandon ship and minutes later sends his last radio message.


ship listing, Vanin tried to correct by counterflooding

orders port ballast tanks blow at 4:30 pm, but don't have right valves that close underwater and pressure hull was breached. This causes the ship to take on water even faster. At 4:42 pm he orders the crew to abandom ship and sends his last radio message


does this make any sense? he was flooding the ship with more water, then blew tanks that (according to CIA) caused rapid flooding that did the ship in


something off with Vanin--he was the one who delayed the freon, then spent 80 minutes trying to send an SoS, then this


	At 5:00 p.m. two life rafts are inflated on the bow, and the aircraft drops a rescue pod. Men begin to enter them. The captain goes below to get the last of his crew, but now Komsomolets is sinking fast. The last man on the bridge shuts the hatch as water pours over the conning tower. The water would drown those still inside if he left the hatch open. Komsomolets is equipped with an escape capsule, and perhaps they can use it. At 5:08 p.m. Komsomolets begins to sink stern first. It will be an hour before surface help arrives.

	The self-rescue is not going well. One life raft overturns. Men crowd aboard, but some have to cling to the sides. The second raft goes down with the sub, breaks free, but too far for the men to reach. More small rafts are dropped from the rescue aircraft, but there are not enough for the 50 men in the water. On the large raft, men's hands are getting numb. Doctor Zayats tells them to hang on by their teeth. Some succeed, but in the next hour more than half, including Babyenko and Filippov, slip away and drown.

	Inside the sinking Komsomolets six men are still alive. Captain Vanin guides them to their last hope, the escape capsule. American submariners would not have this option. They close the hatch. Vanin counts . . . himself, Yudin, Slyusarenko, Krasnobayev, Chernikov . . . one is missing . . . Ispenkov. They hear a knocking, try to open the hatch, but it is too late. The outer compartment's walls collapse. Komsomolets goes down 300, 500, 1,000 feet. At 1,300 feet the scale no longer records, but the sub continues down. The men desperately try to release the capsule but without success. Another explosion rocks the ship, and suddenly the escape capsule breaks free--flying to the surface. Once there, the hatch blows off. But only Slyusarenko is able to get out, as the capsule floods in the rough seas. Vanin, Yudin, Krasnobayev, and Chernikov sink in the capsule to rejoin Komsomolets more than 5,000 feet below.


men close hatch as ship goes down, since the sub would flood and they have an escape capsule. Vanin and some other crew were in the sub as it went down.

in water, life rafter overturns, some have to cling to the sides. The second raft goes down with sub, pops up too far away. rescue aircraft drops small rafts, but its not enough for 50 men in the water (why not send more aicraft/rafts?)

hands get numb, Dr Zayats tells them to hang on by their teeth

in next hour more than half slip away and drown, including Babyenko and Filippov

6 men still alive in sub, and Vanin guides them to the escape capsule.

The men are Vanin, Yudin, Slyursarekno, Krasnobayev, Chernikov

Ispenkov missing

go with sub down below 1,300 feet

try to release capsule without success, then "explosion rocks ship and suddenly they break free"

makes it to surface and hatch blows off. But capsule floods and only Slyusarekno makes it out... the rest sink to bottom of the sea (how does this happen?)


	Shortly after 6:00 p.m. a fishing boat arrives and picks up 30 crewmen. Of the 69 crewmembers, 39 are already dead. Molchanov is recovered and feels fine, but the smoke inhaled while keeping the deck log in the control room and the water's chill have taken their toll. He and two more will soon die. Doctor Zayats and Warrant Officer Slyusarenko are among the survivors.



Soviet Navy, Norwegians, U.S., never get there, but a fishing boat picks them up at 6:00 PM. By then, 39 already dead.

Molchanov said to die from smoke inhalation taking its toll


	The Aftermath

	Komsomolets did not die quietly. In the era of glasnost this incident could not be covered up, even in the Soviet media. Moreover, the Norwegians observed the rescue attempts and were worried about radioactivity released in their economic zone. Recriminations mounted. The Norwegians claimed they could have reached the scene by air or surface two hours before the submarine sank. Within a week a blow-by-blow account appeared in the widely circulated Soviet newspapers Komsmolskaya Pravda and Sovietskaya Rossiya with detailed time-events from the rescue aircraft point of view. Within a month the crew, dead and alive, was awarded the Order of the Red Banner, and more stories explained why it took so long for help to arrive. Two months after the sinking, the oceanographic rescue ship Akademik Mstislav Keldysh using submersibles found Komsomolets a mile down.


CIA says "could not be covered up even in Soviet media" because of glassnot (wasn't TASS reporting on it a few hours after AP?)

aftermath included Norwegian worries about radiation pollution, mounting recrimations related

Norwegians claimed they could have got there two hours before sank (what is explanation for why they didn't go rescue?)

detailed blow-by-blow account in newspapers within a week

survivors given  order of red banner, more stories to explain why it took so long for help to arrive.



------


some things that don't add up

Captain Vanin acting strangely, basically acted to make the ship sink before rescue, and faster. Delayed putting out fire, delayed rescue, brought in more water to ship and blew tank that did it in

Soviet gov also delayed the rescue before the ship sank


For the 15 minutes the ship started rapidly taking on water, Vanin decided to go in and the 5 other men stayed inside.


Inside they stay in until 1,300 feet, escape on escape craft, then somehow only one of the 6 makes it out of that alive


what were the 6 men doing on the Komsomolet as it sank?



------


https://www.nytimes.com/1989/05/04/world/rescue-capsule-saved-only-1-on-sinking-soviet-submarine.html
	Rescue Capsule Saved Only 1 On Sinking Soviet Submarine

	By BERNARD E. TRAINOR and SPECIAL TO THE NEW YORK TIMES

	The Soviet experimental attack submarine that sank in the Norwegian Sea last month was equipped with a rescue sphere that malfunctioned when five trapped crew members tried to escape, an American official and Soviet publications say.

	After a fire broke out in the submarine April 7, five crewmen made it into the rescue sphere. It apparently failed to detach itself until the submarine hit bottom 5,000 feet below the surface, where the pressure reached 2,200 pounds per square inch. When the capsule surfaced, two crew members were blown into the ocean by air pressure released when the escape hatch opened.

	One sailor who had worn a breathing device was rescued and survived, but his shipmate was lost at sea. 


but it was the cold that was foremost deadly, not drowning


	The three remaining seamen in the capsule, including the captain, Y. E. Vanin, were not wearing masks and apparently died of asphyxiation from toxic smoke that had seeped into the capsule. A total of 42 sailors, of a crew of 69, were reported lost in the accident. The other survivors escaped before the submarine sank.


how did "toxic smoke" get there in the middle of the ocean?


	...The American official said the Soviet Navy had reconstructed events surrounding the submarine's loss and had made some details public in Tass dispatches and Krasnaya Zvezda, the Soviet military journal. The Soviet reports give this account:

	A fire broke out in the stern compartment of the submarine while it was submerged. When compressed air lines ruptured and fed the fire, flames spread forward toward the compartment containing the submarine's nuclear reactor. Automatic damage control systems and the efforts of the crew failed to contain the flames, and after five hours, in danger of going down with all hands, the submarine was forced to surface.

	Some crew members then abandoned ship in rubber rafts, but part of the crew including the captain stayed aboard fighting the fire and shutting down the submarine's nuclear reactors. The submarine's reactor engineer, who survived the sinking left the ship after the reactor was shut down.

	When the submarine lost buoyancy and sank, five crewmen sealed themselves into the escape capsule


differ from CIA account, or rather compatabile but misleading in sly way

the reactor had already been shut down, and Vanin and the 5 men were down there for different reasons

CIA account says in control room, "manning the generator," and 4 warrant officers "trying to save the ship"

account says Vanin had already radioed rescue craft to say fire contained by then, cites his main problem as ship taking on water and listing

shutting down reactor like NY times says they were doing would be reason to go down with the ship, but that's not what they were doing


	...sealed themselves into the escape capsule, which was already partly flooded and filling with smoke. The capsule, which submarine experts believe was manually operated, apparently failed to separate from the submarine during the descent, but detached when the submarine reached the sea-bed and carried the five crewmen back to the surface. 

	Sphere Eventually Sank

	How the crew released the capsule is not known. But an American submarine officer said it was remarkable that the capsule worked at all from a depth of 5,000 feet and that anybody survived the ordeal. The escape sphere took on seawater after the hatch was opened. It eventually sank. 


says sphere detached from ocean floor, 5,000 ft depth

if sank, how did Slyusarenko survive? factor for survival would be wet suit, not breathing mask

incrediulous that there would be more smoke in capsule after hatch blown, or more smoke in capsule than in the air they were breathing in the sub already


were bodies ever recovered?


info on escape capsule: https://twitter.com/Capt_Navy/status/991748141400625152



NY Times says a miracle Slyusarenko made it out alive, I want to know why it failed to release then immediately sank...


spends rest of the article saying Salvage job will be too difficult



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Submarine_depth_ratings
	Crush depth
	Crush depth, officially called collapse depth,[2] is the submerged depth at which a submarine's hull is expected to collapse due to pressure. This is normally calculated. However, it is not always accurate. Submarines from many nations in World War II reported being forced through crush depth, due to flooding or mechanical failure, only to have the water pumped out, or the failure repaired, and succeed in surfacing again. One of the most popular stories of this occurring was the story of U-96, in the movie Das Boot. These reports are not necessarily verifiable, and popular misunderstanding of the difference between test depth and collapse depth can confuse the discussion. World War II German U-boats generally had collapse depths in the range of 200 to 280 metres (660 to 920 feet).[citation needed] Modern nuclear attack submarines like the American Seawolf class are estimated to have a test depth of 490 m (1,600 ft),[1] which would imply (see above) a collapse depth of 730 m (2,400 ft).


https://www.nonproliferation.org/komsomolets-a-disaster-waiting-to-happen/
	By tonnage and speed, the Komsomolets is within the range of the latest US attack submarines of the Los Angeles-class. [1] The Komsomolets was built and based near Murmansk and was designed, according to a Soviet Navy officer, to test technologies, materials, and operations at great depths. The sub’s titanium double hull enabled it to dive to 3,000 feet three times deeper than conventional steel-hulled subs.


right though about that capsule supposedly working from 5,000 feet...


CIA account only says this: "Komsomolets goes down 300, 500, 1,000 feet. At 1,300 feet the scale no longer records, but the sub continues down. The men desperately try to release the capsule but without success. Another explosion rocks the ship, and suddenly the escape capsule breaks free--flying to the surface."


------


another account of sinking:


https://www.nonproliferation.org/komsomolets-a-disaster-waiting-to-happen/
	By tonnage and speed, the Komsomolets is within the range of the latest US attack submarines of the Los Angeles-class. [1] The Komsomolets was built and based near Murmansk and was designed, according to a Soviet Navy officer, to test technologies, materials, and operations at great depths. The sub’s titanium double hull enabled it to dive to 3,000 feet three times deeper than conventional steel-hulled subs.

	By April 7, 1989, the Komsomolets had been at sea tracking US subs for 39 days. [2] At approximately 11:00 am, a short circuit sparked a fire in the seventh compartment. The fire spread to the sixth compartment, killing an officer. At the same time, a power surge swept through the electrical system, sparking new fires throughout the submarine.


differ from CIA account, "power surge" sparked new fires as original spread

CIA said something about oil pressure and fire "arced through cableways"


	The Komsomolets surfaced and sent an SOS to the Soviet military communications network. Navy headquarters deliberated over rescue plans, causing what may have been a fatal delay.


even after captain Vanin's SoS, Navy HQ delayed "deliberating over rescue plans"


	Soviet rescue ships started out towards the sub from a navy base near Murmansk, some thirteen hours away from the rescue party. Crewmen on the sub fought the fire, passing out from air saturated with carbon monoxide that was fed through their gas masks. Though poisoned crewmen were carried up to the deck, two men died immediately. Commander Vanin, the sub’s main officer, decided to let the fire in these compartments burn itself out, as he saw no possibility of stopping them. The fire burned through seals in the hull, and water gushed into the sixth and seventh compartments.


Vanin decieded to let fire "burn itself out" in some compartments, then fire burned through seals in the hull...


	The order to evacuate was given. Only one raft capable of holding twenty-five men was inflated; fifty crewmen tried to climb aboard. The submarine began to sink, stem-first, into the sea. Several officers and crewmen, including Commander Vanin, remained inside. They attempted to escape in the emergency capsule, a device unique to Soviet submarines. The capsule failed to detach until the submarine hit bottom, where the pressure mounted to 2,200 pounds per sq. inch. When it finally surfaced, two crew members were blown into the ocean and the others left inside perished from toxic smoke. Only one man survived in the escape capsule.


does this make sense? in diagram capsule was in fin on top of sub, and smoke and toxic fumes accumulate at top (supposed to crawl in a fire), so maybe capsule had worse fumes than the rest of the sub. This would mean probably all but the survivor were dead or done for before they got to the surface.


	Efforts to inflate other emergency rafts were unsuccessful. Many crewmen clung to the raft, immersed in 36-degree water. Twenty-nine men were rescued alive, but two of them later died from shock. Of the forty-two casualties, only four were reported to have died from the fire and subsequent explosions; the rest drowned or died from immersion in the icy water while awaiting help.


	...In April 1989, the Soviet Navy indicated its intention to raise the Komsomolets. Admiral Vargin of the Northern Reet sought to reassure the public of the lack of danger, emphasizing that the sub’s nuclear reactor had been “fully shut down” before the sub sank. Also, the two torpedoes equipped with nuclear warheads that were on board had sunk to the bottom without detonating. “They were not battle ready,” Vargin said, “and experts concluded they don’t represent a danger.” [6] 


launched salvage effort afterward, two nuclear torpedoes had sunk to the bottom


	American experts doubt that Soviet efforts alone can raise the sub. While the Soviet Navy has submersible equipment and a number of sub salvage and rescue ships, these are primarily designed to handle submersibles sent down to rescue trapped crews. None have lifts or cranes capable of handling more than 750 tons. Norman Polmar, an expert on the Soviet Navy, said that the Soviets could modify supertankers to provide sufficiently large platforms, but doubted if they could plan and assemble the equipment necessary for the operation. “While technically possible, it is an incredibly difficult undertaking,” said Donald Dean, a salvage technician who questioned the operation. [7] Instead of raising the submarine. Dean suggested posting a sea-going tug over the site of the sub to maintain Soviet jurisdictional rights and to prevent other countries from gaining information about the sub’s technology.

	The Leningrad Central Design Office for Marine Technology “Rubin,” which was charged by the government to salvage the Komsomolets, announced in June 1990 that it would collaborate with the Deep Sea Operations Consortium based in the Netherlands. The Consortium of five Dutch companies, led by the salvage group Smit Internationale NV, was chosen by the Soviet Design Office for Marine Technology. They plan to raise the submarine in the summer of 1992. D.C. Kaakebeen, a spokesman for Smit Internationale, stated, “We will simply raise [the sub] and hand it over to the Soviets.” [8] He noted that no ship has ever been raised from a depth greater than 660 feet, while the sub lies at 5,600. The first phase of the operation, a viability study, was scheduled to begin in 1990, and Mr. Kaakebeen said the group hoped to raise the sub sometime in the summer of 1992.


American experts doubts Soviets alone can raise sub, Russian office of marine technology announces in 1990 will collaborate with consortium of 5 dutch companies, plan to raise in 1992. No ship ever raised from depth below 660 feet before.


	Yurii Soldatov, Deputy Director of the Main Administration of the Ship Construction Ministry, elaborated the Russian view of the sub’s raising and provided various reasons for the decision to raise the Komsomolets. [9] In addition to the assertion that a decisive explanation for the accident can only be found by raising the sub, Soldatov stressed the urgency of the salvage by alluding to the environmental hazard posed by the USS Scorpion, which sunk in 1968 off the Sea of Azores. While the US Navy stated at first that radiation leaks were impossible, a recent analysis of the water has confirmed the presence of heavy metals. The Komsomolets sunk in a biologically productive area in which the Soviet Union, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, and Great Britain all have fishing and overall ecological interests.


ship construction ministry directio Soldatov says want to raise sub becuase that's only way to get decisive explanation for the accident, nuclear material might pollute area


	...Yurii Soldatov, Deputy Director of the Main Administration of the Ship Construction Ministry, elaborated the Russian view of the sub’s raising and provided various reasons for the decision to raise the Komsomolets. [9] In addition to the assertion that a decisive explanation for the accident can only be found by raising the sub, Soldatov stressed the urgency of the salvage by alluding to the environmental hazard posed by the USS Scorpion, which sunk in 1968 off the Sea of Azores. While the US Navy stated at first that radiation leaks were impossible, a recent analysis of the water has confirmed the presence of heavy metals. The Komsomolets sunk in a biologically productive area in which the Soviet Union, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, and Great Britain all have fishing and overall ecological interests.


Norwegian gov commission opposed raising sub! said reactor might restart, could lead to more pollution


	It was reported in September 1991 that a Soviet team dived six times to a depth of 1,700 meters in deep-sea craft. They took radiation readings as well as samples from the seabed and water. Using manipulators, divers managed to extract the equipment that had fallen off as the sub sank the hydro-acoustic station receiver, a hatch ring, and a giant screw bolt. [12] 


subermisible team visited site in 1991


	Problems with the Nuclear Fleet

	The sinking of the Komsomolets caused great controversy in the former Soviet Union, where it was suggested that the Navy sought no help from Norway because it did not want the technology from its prototype submarine to fall into Western hands. [13] More crewmen might have survived, it is asserted, if Norwegian rescue stations that were located near the Komsomolets had been contacted.


Navy was accused of not asking Norway for help because they didn't want Norway to see tech


does seem like they were trying to hide something


but maybe more intereresting that Soviet gov themselves delayed rescue

early reports say crew scuttled the sub

CIA report says captain had problem with "garbled" sos message for > 1 hr, this report says Navy had problems with "deliberations for a rescue plan"

sunk on purpose or not, a lot came together to end with the sub sinking before anyone else could reach it...

also noteworthy that captain Vanin and the 6 wouldn't have had a reason to have been staying inside the sub if rescue had gotten there earlier


	Soviet officials admit that the sub accident did bring specific problems to the surface. O.D. Baklanov, the Soviet official heading the Komsomolets inquiry, stated that specialists discovered that certain faults in the prototype sub’s electrical and hydraulic systems contributed to the fire and thus require modification. In addition, rescue services that are performed jointly by the navy, merchant marine, and fishing fleet need to be integrated and made more efficient. [14] 


Soviet official Baklanov said problems with hydraulic and electrical systems


	The Komsomolets disaster made apparent a host of problems involving the former Soviet nuclear-powered fleet, some which will pose danger for years to come. Poor maintenance standards and inadequate safety precautions have caused explosions in civilian nuclear-power plants, in disposal tanks for nuclear waste, and aboard nuclear-powered submarines. Nuclear reactors began powering naval vessels in 1954, with the commissioning of the USS Nautilus. Currently some 550 reactors power about 350 vessels worldwide. [15] Soviet estimates show the number of nuclear-powered vessels may be larger. According to an article in Energiya, the former Soviet Union had approximately 380 reactors on board its ships. 350 of these reactors are used to power submarines, six are aboard battle cruisers, and twenty-five are on icebreakers, Naval research ships, and unarmed atomic-powered submarines. Energiya further stated that “[the USSR] has lost no fewer than five submarines. Four of these downed subs carried nuclear weapons and nuclear reactors…43 nuclear warheads and six nuclear reactors lie at the bottom of the sea. All of these lie in sea water, are being corroded, and are awaiting their time.” [16] Citing US Navy dossiers as its source, Greenpeace reports that as a result of eleven accidents, more than 50 nuclear warheads and eight reactors now lie on the floor of the world’s oceans. [17] Most of them are said to have belonged to the former Soviet Union.


8 reactors and 50 nuclear warheads now lie at the bottom of the sea, most Soviet

Komsomolet not unique in this


	In a public letter addressed to the USSR Procurator-General Trubin, Captain Ilya Kolton, a research fellow at the Kurchatov Nuclear Energy Institute, accused Admiral of the Fleet Chemavin of acts of criminal liability that contributed to the Komsomolets disaster. [18] He blamed the Navy for authorizing the addition of vessels unfit for combat operations to the stock of fighting ships. Kolton alleged that problems with nuclear-powered submarines are the result of monopolistic attitudes in industry and science and the total power of admirals, and that the buoyant escape chamber aboard the Komsomolets that failed to work was never tested at its maximum depth. According to Kolton, in 1988 top naval commanders knew about the chamber’s structural faults because they had been detected in other subs.


after a string of failures, Soviet officials blame it on corruption and poor manufacturing

sounds familiar...


	The Komsomolets disaster also reflects general difficulties brought on by the stagnation and disintegration of the Soviet system itself. Flaws that existed in central planning and the infrastructure for years are now becoming apparent in every phase of the Soviet nuclear power industry. [19] Technical requirements, proper equipment testing, and coordination of rescue efforts do not function effectively. Human error is yet another important cause of accidents. For instance, in a 1988 accident aboard the nuclear submarine Rossiya, Chief Physicist Kushelev issued an erroneous command to open a valve, which almost led to reactor meltdown. It was discovered that Kushelev had been kept on watch duty for five days without relief. He had been compelled to work on account of ambitious planning targets that led to “storming,” which is a last-minute rush to complete a task on deadline. [20]

	The sinking of the Komsomolets has been followed by a number of other serious accidents involving nuclear-powered submarines. On June 26, 1989 a month after the Komsomolets accident – an accident occurred in the Norwegian Sea involving an unnamed Soviet submarine, in which several persons supposedly were exposed to radiation. [21] More recently, on June 3, 1992, an explosion on a nuclear submarine took place at the northern base of Semeromorsk. A compressor exploded while it was being inspected, and although the blast was not reported to have affected the submarine’s reactor, one officer died and five of the crew were injured. [22] As for the Komsomolets, it is not known at this time whether the submarine will be raised as planned in the summer of 1992, or which office within the former Soviet government has assumed responsibility for the operation. The salvage operation may well have lost its priority as the Russian government wrestles with basic issues of economic reform, ownership of military forces, and political legitimacy.


Komsomolet part of a string of contemporary failures, including another with human error were Chief Physicist opened valve  that almost led to reactor meltdown


	August 15, 2000 Update

	The Komsomolets remains on the ocean floor to this day. Periodically calls have been made for its retrieval, but the likelihood of any action in the near future is slim.


plan to raise abandoned, still on bottom today: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_submarine_K-278_Komsomolets#Aftermath


------