
http://sciencenordic.com/archaeologists-and-historians-clash-geneticists-over-viking-study
	Archaeologists and historians clash with geneticists over Viking study

	Geneticists and biologists are increasingly involved in historical research. But as the new boys on the block, collaborations do not always run smoothly.

	A large DNA study has received criticism from archaeologists who think that geneticists have gotten the wrong end of the stick and misunderstood the Viking occupation of England.

	The story is just the latest in a series of examples demonstrating how archaeologists, historians, and geneticists are far from in agreement on how the past should be interpreted and described.

	“The debate on the Vikings in England sets a trend that is often debated among archaeologists—that geneticists don’t have all the necessary knowledge of the historical sources,” says Søren Sindbæk, archaeologist and professor with special responsibilities in the School of Culture and Society from Aarhus University, Denmark.
	A newcomer to writing history

	Archaeologists and historians have traditionally documented our history, but in recent decades, DNA has entered the field as an entirely new form of historical evidence.

	...“Archaeologists can feel threatened”

	The controversies between archaeologists, historians, and geneticists in-part stems from DNA scientists who do not always understand the historical context or overlook important historical details, says Professor Rasmus Nielsen from the Center for Theoretical Evolutionary Genomics at the University of California, Berkeley, USA.

	“But the debate is also a result of archaeologists who feel threatened by a new form of historical data that they don’t control,” says Nielsen.

	Professor and director of The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics at the University of Oxford, Peter Donnelly, points out that DNA research can provide new information and a different view of history.

	“Archaeology often tells us about the rich in society--jewellery and many other artefacts tell us about society's elite. There is a famous saying that history is written by the victors. But genetic material does not distinguish between rich and poor or winners and losers,” says Donnelly.

	“Therefore, DNA studies contribute new pages to our written history, but it’s obviously very important that we work together with archaeologists and historians,” says Donnelly, who co-authored a large DNA study to map historical migrations to the UK using modern DNA—one being the Danish Viking invasions from the 9th to the 11th century.


big problem in history is that some chroniclers had an agenda, and the more evidence you get the better you can tease out what that was and compare to other data


	...Physics is already integrated

	Sindbæk points out that there’s a long history of other scientists hopping a board the archaeology train: physicists, chemists, and other natural scientists were involved long before geneticists and biologists came along, he says.

	For example, physicists had already begun to revolutionise archaeology in the 1950s with the use of radioactive carbon-14 to date archaeological remains.

	“[These years represent] the third revolution of natural sciences in archaeology. Biological methods proved particularly popular. [These] new methods [could] investigate at a molecular level, be that antiquities, or remains of animals or people,” says Sindbæk.

	“Things that previously were [considered] just dead material are suddenly an enormous source of knowledge about the past, and that has certainly helped archaeology. DNA research is just one aspect of this exciting archaeological revolution. We can suddenly get information about the past by studying living human genomes,” he says.


remember reading some attacking carbon-dating as innacurate too, particularly from creationists (example: http://www.cs.unc.edu/~plaisted/ce/dating2.html)

like this article:

https://www.nytimes.com/1990/05/31/us/errors-are-feared-in-carbon-dating.html
	Archives | 1990

	ERRORS ARE FEARED IN CARBON DATING

	By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

	Since 1947, scientists have reckoned the ages of many old objects by measuring the amounts of radioactive carbon they contain. New research shows, however, that some estimates based on carbon may have erred by thousands of years.

	It is too soon to know whether the discovery will seriously upset the estimated dates of events like the arrival of human beings in the Western Hemisphere, scientists said. But it is already clear that the carbon method of dating will have to be recalibrated and corrected in some cases.

	Scientists at the Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory of Columbia University at Palisades, N.Y., reported today in the British journal Nature that some estimates of age based on carbon analyses were wrong by as much as 3,500 years. They arrived at this conclusion by comparing age estimates obtained using two different methods - analysis of radioactive carbon in a sample and determination of the ratio of uranium to thorium in the sample. In some cases, the latter ratio appears to be a much more accurate gauge of age than the customary method of carbon dating, the scientists said.

	...Dating Subject to Error

	But scientists have long recognized that carbon dating is subject to error because of a variety of factors, including contamination by outside sources of carbon. Therefore they have sought ways to calibrate and correct the carbon dating method. The best gauge they have found is dendrochronology: the measurement of age by tree rings.

	Accurate tree ring records of age are available for a period extending 9,000 years into the past. But the tree ring record goes no further, so scientists have sought other indicators of age against which carbon dates can be compared. One such indicator is the uranium-thorium dating method used by the Lamont-Doherty group.

	Uranium 234, a radioactive element present in the environment, slowly decays to form thorium 230. Using a mass spectrometer, an instrument that accelerates streams of atoms and uses magnets to sort them out according to mass and electric charge, the group has learned to measure the ratio of uranium to thorium very precisely.

	The Lamont-Doherty scientists conducted their analyses on samples of coral drilled from a reef off the island of Barbados. The samples represented animals that lived at various times during the last 30,000 years.

	Uranium-Thorium Dating

	Dr. Alan Zindler, a professor of geology at Columbia University who is a member of the Lamont-Doherty research group, said age estimates using the carbon dating and uranium-thorium dating differed only slightly for the period from 9,000 years ago to the present. ''But at earlier times, the carbon dates were substantially younger than the dates we estimated by uranium-thorium analysis,'' he said. ''The largest deviation, 3,500 years, was obtained for samples that are about 20,000 years old.''

	One reason the group believes the uranium-thorium estimates to be more accurate than carbon dating is that they produce better matches between known changes in the Earth's orbit and changes in global glaciation.

	According to carbon dating of fossil animals and plants, the spreading and receding of great ice sheets lagged behind orbital changes by several thousand years, a delay that scientists found hard to explain. But Dr. Richard G. Fairbanks, a member of the Lamont-Doherty group, said that if the dates of glaciation were determined using the uranium-thorium method, the delay - and the puzzle - disappeared.

	The group theorizes that large errors in carbon dating result from fluctuations in the amount of carbon 14 in the air. Changes in the Earth's magnetic field would change the deflection of cosmic-ray particles streaming toward the Earth from the Sun. Carbon 14 is thought to be mainly a product of bombardment of the atmosphere by cosmic rays, so cosmic ray intensity would affect the amount of carbon 14 in the environment at any given time. #30,000-Year Limit The Lamont-Doherty group says uranium-thorium dating not only is more precise than carbon dating in some cases, but also can be used to date much older objects. Carbon dating is unreliable for objects older than about 30,000 years, but uranium-thorium dating may be possible for objects up to half a million years old, Dr. Zindler said. The method is less suitable, however, for land animals and plants than for marine organisms, because uranium is plentiful in sea water but less so in most soils.

	But even if the method is limited to marine organisms, it will be extremely useful for deciphering the history of Earth's climate, ice, oceans and rocks, Dr. Fairbanks said.


paper cited:

http://doc.rero.ch/record/210333/files/PAL_E4371.pdf
	Calibration of the 14C timescale over the past 30,000 years using mass spectrometric U-Th ages from Barbados corals

	Edouard Bard, Bruno Hamelin, Richard G. Fairbanks & Alan Zindler

	Uranium-thorium ages obtained by mass spectrometry from corals raised off the sialnds of Barados confirm the high precision of this technique over at least the past 30,000 years. Comparison of the U-Th ages with 14C ages obtained on the Holocene samples shows that the U-Th ages are accurate, because they accord with the dendrochronological calibration. Before 9,000 yr BP the 14C ages are systematically younger than the U-Th ages, with a maximum differences of ~3,500 yr at ~20,000 yr BP. The U-Th technique thus provides a way of calibrating the radiocarbon timescale beyond the range of dendrochronological calibration.

	...Recently 234U-239Th dating of corals by thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) has been demonstrated to be significantly more precise and accurate than the [alpha]-counting method. It has been predicted that U-Th dating would be even more precise than the 14C in the time range of the last deglaciation (6-20 kyr). We have implemented this technique at the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and measured TH and 14C ages in the same coral samples to enable comparison of the two geochrometers. Here we focus on the U-TH/14C comparsison for the past 30,000 years.

	...The most striking result is that the Th ages are consistently older than the 14C ages, with a maximum difference of ~3.5 kyr at ~20 Th kyr BP (Fib. 2). The difference between the two chronometers is equivalent to a [Delta]14C of ~400-500% above the present-day reference level for ages between 18 and 22 kyr BP.


graph shows in agreement until 9,000 years ago then veers off linearly until off by 3,500 yr at 20,000 years ago


	...Before the Holocene, we cannot yet demonstrate that our U-Th ages are true 'calendar' ages, but we will argue that this is a reasonable assumption.


Holocene beginning of current geological epoch about 11k years ago

in their data carbon dating disagreed with Th by a few hundred years at that point

goes on about looking at what could have caused the discrepency where their results imply 400-500% more C14 20,000 years ago. This was where the C14 and Uranium-Thorium results were off by 3,500 years

considered contamination of the samples, "diagenetic alteration or uranium exchange", uranium loss


	...A definitive test of the accuracy of the 14C ages used in this comparison will be to replicate all of the measurements by AMS.

	The good quality of the corals for U-Th was tested by X-ray diffraction which showed that no secondary calcite was detectable in the corals. This is important, but not sufficient, to rule out any diagenetic alteration or uranium exchange. The strongest argument for the quality of the samples comes from the U-Th measurements themselves: all the initial 234U/238U ratios fall in the range of the modern sea water (activity ration between 1.14 and 1.1.5, ref. 21) in contrast with older air-exposed samples


says definite test will be to replicate measurements, spends rest of the paper on explanation of discrepancy with carbon cycle changes or changes in C14 production


	...Carbon cycle changes

	The 14C-age calculation relies on the assumption that the atmospheric 14C/C ratio has not changed with time and therefore can be used to normalize the measured ration in fossil carbon. Unfortunately, the atmosphere contains less than a ton of 14C and most of the radiocarbon is in the ocean (> 40 tons). Subtle changes in the reservoir sizes and/or rates of exchange between reservoirs could have significantly affected the 14C content of the atmosphere. CO2 measurements in old polar ice showed that the atmospheric concentration was lower during the last glacial than during the Holocene.


Need to know ration of isotope 14C and C to calculate carbon date, not that much 14 c in the atmosphere, and found that it was lower during glacial period, and can be different for ocean and atmosphere


	...A model calculation similar to that of Oeschger et al. shows that the difference in 14C between the surface and the deep sea would have to be increased by ~3.5 kyr to account for a 400% higher atmospheric 14C/C. This age difference is not supported by the palaeoceanographic data on benthic-planktonic pairs of foraminifera dated by 14C AMS. These studies have shown that the ventilation age difference was higher in the Pacific by ~500+/-100 yr (refs 43, 44) and in the Atlantic by 200 +/- 200 yr (ref. 44). Assuming that the highest values measured in the Pacific are valid for the global ocean would lead to a maximal atmospheric 14C/C ratio increase of ~70%.

	In summary, changes in the carbon cycle can account for only ~100-150% increase in the [delta]14C of the atmopshere as compared to the 400-500% inferred from the Barbados data.


says theres a problem that carbon-cycle data doesn't account for the 400-500% C14 difference

	
	Changes in the 14C production

	The mean 14C/C ration of the exchangeable carbon on the Earth is maintained by a steady state between production by cosmic rays in the upper atmosphere and radiodecay. The 14C of the atmosphere can therefore undergo variations in response to changes in the flux of galactic protons, solar-wind magnetic properties or the dipole moment of the Earth.

	Little is known about possible variations of the cosmic rays on the timescale of interest. As discussed below, the main [Delta]14C variations during the Holocene can be explained by changes of the magnetic field and/or changes in the ocean circulation. Therefore it is not necessary to call for a modulatino of the galactic protons, and this flux can be assumed to be constant with time until data is produced to the contrary.

	Changes in the solar-wind modulation are also poorly known...

	...We assumed no error on the 14C production algorithm and constant errors of 5 and 10% of the present-day magnetic field on the palaeomagnetic record. There is clear agreement between the [delta]14C data calculated from the U-TH/14C comparison and our calcuation based on the palaeomagnetic record. The [delta]14C values around 18-22 kyr BP are, however, higher on average than the paleomagnetism reconstruction, which may indicate that ~100% of the signal is the result of reservoir changes associated with the last glacial maximum.

	It must be mentioned that some of the palaeomagnetism data compiled by McElhinny and Senanayake were dated by 14C. Using our calibration (Fib. 2) to correct the timescale would only stretch the predicted [delta]14C curve by a few kyr. The U-Th/14C would still be well within the errors of the geomagnetic reconstruction of the [delta]14C curve. Therefore the most reasonable explanation for the large difference between the 14C and U-Th ages involves magnetic modulation of the atmosphere 14C production rate.


after ruling out everything else, figure change in magnetic field is the most reasonable explanation for the discrepency


	Discussion

	We have shown here that by using U-Th mass spectrometry one can achieve an age precision and reproducibility comparable to or even better than that obtained by the radiocarbon geochronicological method. U-Th ages measured in corals drilled off the shore of Barbados indicate that the 14C timescale is significantly compressed during the late glacial interval These results can be explained mainly as the consequences of chances in the cosmogenic nuclide production linked to the gradual decrease of the Earth's magnetic field. Changes in the carbon cycle can account for ~10-20% of the age discrepency observed between the two geochronometers. It should be borne in mind that the accuracy of the U-Th ages is proven only back to 10,000 years; nevertheless, all geophysical information available (dendrochronology, varve dating and paleomagnetism) suggests that our U-Th results are reasonable and that they may be used as a first-order tool to calibrate the radiocarbon timescale beyond the range of the high-resolution dendrochonological comparison.


paper concluded their Uranium-Thorim dating data was only proven back 10,000 years, during which the C14 and Uranium-Thorim data agreed. Data implied a huge discrepency in C14 20,000 years ago which they spent most of the paper discussing. After a back-of-the-hand calculation concluded changes in the earth's magnetic field was the most reasonable explanation for the discrepency.


NY Times headline: "ERRORS ARE FEARED IN CARBON DATING"

"it is already clear that the carbon method of dating will have to be recalibrated and corrected in some cases."

"some estimates of age based on carbon analyses were wrong by as much as 3,500 years."


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malcolm_Browne
	Browne's career in journalism began when he was drafted during the Korean War,[3] and assigned to the Pacific edition of the Stars and Stripes where he worked for two years. He worked for the Middletown Times Herald-Record,[4] then joined the Associated Press (AP), working in Baltimore from 1959 to 1961, at which point he was made chief correspondent for Indochina. On June 11, 1963 he took his famous photographs of the death of Thích Quảng Đức. After having won a Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting[5] and receiving many job offers, he eventually left the AP in 1965.


drafted in Korean war and, apparently, got his revenge by taking it out on the rest of the world and working for the people who started the war in the first place

or was he born into it? also went to weird school


	He worked for ABC TV for about a year but became dissatisfied with television journalism.[1] He worked freelance for several years, and did a year's fellowship at Columbia University with the Council on Foreign Relations. In 1968, he joined The New York Times, and in 1972 became its correspondent for South America. Before becoming a journalist Browne worked as a chemist,[3] and in 1977, he became a science writer, serving as a senior editor for Discover. He returned to the Times in 1985. He covered the Persian Gulf War in 1991.


didn't work for NY Times until 1972, was journalist through middle of 50's

worked for Council on Foreign Relations

later science writer and writer for discover


http://webarchive.loc.gov/all/20120828120520/http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/U/US_OBIT_BROWNE?SITE=AP&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT
	Browne spent most of his journalism career at The New York Times, where he put in 30 years of his four decades as a journalist, much of it in war zones.


war reporter a lot, mostly at NY Times


	...Malcolm Wilde Browne was born in New York on April 17, 1931. He graduated from Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania with a degree in chemistry. Working in a lab when drafted in 1956, he was sent to Korea as a tank driver, but by chance got a job writing for a military newspaper, and from that came a decision to trade science for a career in journalism.


first was to be tank driver after drafted, then "by chance" got a job in newspaper


	...He worked first for the Middletown Daily Record in New York, where he worked alongside Hunter S. Thompson, author of "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas."


workred with Hunter S. Thompson in middletown daily record


	...Writing about official corruption and military incompetence, the group - which also included the Times' Halberstam, Neil Sheehan of UPI, Charles Mohr of Time magazine, Nick Turner of Reuters and others - were accused by critics in Vietnam and Washington of aiding the communist cause.


got attention for communist activities during war

	
	...In his 1993 memoir, "Muddy Boots and Red Socks," Browne said he "did not go to Vietnam harboring any opposition to America's role in the Vietnamese civil war" but became disillusioned by the Kennedy administration's secretive "shadow war" concealing the extent of U.S. involvement.


wrote memior "muddy boots and red socks"


	...Amid the furor over tendentious coverage, some reporters claimed to have received death threats, and Browne said his name was among those on a list of "supposed enemies of the state who had to be eliminated."


sounds about right so far!

apparently he got a "government persecution" badge of honor while working at vietnam


	...In the 1998 interview, he said that he "never took that seriously," but that when government agents tried to arrest his wife, who had angered officials by quitting her information ministry job, Browne stared them down by standing in his doorway brandishing a souvenir submachine gun.


threatened his wife for quitting info ministry job

kindof weird--maybe wanted to get out but coerced?


	Tall, lanky and blond, Browne was a cerebral and eccentric character with a penchant for red socks - they were easy to match, he explained - and an acerbic wit befitting his grandfather's cousin, Oscar Wilde.


most communist thing I've read all day (so far)


	He ridiculed the word "media," for example, as "that dreadful Latin plural our detractors use when they really mean "scum."


likeable guy, despite apparently trying to help erase knowledge of human history

	
	Overall, associates saw him as complex, rather mysterious, and above all, independent.

	"Mal Browne was a loner; he worked alone, did not share his sources and didn't often mix socially with the press group," recalled Faas, who died in 2012. "And stubborn - he wouldn't compromise on a story just to please his editors or anyone else."


personality quircks? something was wrong with Booth and Achenbach. For kind of things they write, I guess most would want to sucker someone into it instead of doing it themselves. Both Booth and Achenbach seemed weirdly passionate about it/chip on their shoulder


	...After a venture into magazine writing, Browne joined The New York Times in 1968. He worked in Latin America, Eastern Europe and Asia, left again to edit a science magazine, and returned to the Times in 1985, mainly as a science writer. He also covered the 1991 Gulf War, again clashing with U.S. officials over censorship issues.


in trouble for leaking secrets in gulf war?



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/1980/02/27/the-cambodian-nightmare-of-prince-sihanouk/1d5dabac-e2ed-4ec1-a12b-7fc2e9435bde/?utm_term=.32c4da10a2fe
	Sihanouk is more than another exotic ruler in exile roaming the world's capitals, never finding a home. For 29 years the erratic but brilliant prince kept his country at peace, holding back the Vietnamese war from drowning Cambodia.

	At the same time, he kept the world entertained. He composed and recorded songs often played at state occasions. It is said he was a womanizer -- even he does not know how many children he has sired.And he confounded the superpowers by saying the only chance for Cambodias survival was for the great nations to find an "entente cordiale . . . a rapprochement."

	...Sihanouk is here on a mission. Since 1970, when he lost power, his country has been visited by every suffering imagined. The six-year civil war ended in 1975, only to be replaced by the brutal regime of Pol Pot, and then the country was invaded by the Vietnamese last year, Famine, the deaths of countless Cambodians under Pol Pot -- all these have led many to consider Cambodia a modern-day Holocaust.

	...For the next hour, Sihanouk orchestrates journalist and Cambodians. A question is raised about Sihanouk's cooperation with the Khmer Rouge, with Pol Pot, who, after winning the war in 1975, put the prince under house arrest and masterminded a brutal revolution, evacuating all the cities and ordering everyone onto agricultural cooperatives that in fact were labor camps. In four years of Pol Pot's rule, as many as one million Cambodians died from starvation and disease or execution by the black-pajamaed Khmer Rouge soldiers who terrorized the country.

	...This was the Sihanouk of old, the king clever enough to abdicate his throne in 1955 so he could be elected chief of state (retaining his title of prince), a master of the public -- and the press.

	In the '60s when he was especially upset, with American war policies in neighboring Vietnam, Sihanouk called in an American reporter -- Malcolm W. Browne -- to share in another audience. The new American ambassador was scheduled to present his credentials to the prince. "Sihanouk used the occasion to berate the U.S. . . . for using spies in the country," Browne recalled. "He positioned me in the throne room so I could be there and hear it all. . . . Obviously, I reported it."


Browne got a special relationship with Sihanouk?


https://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/15/world/asia/norodom-sihanouk-cambodian-leader-through-shifting-allegiances-dies-at-89.html
	Convinced that the United States had been behind the overthrow, King Sihanouk allied himself with the Khmer Rouge at the urging of his Chinese patrons, giving the Cambodian Communists his prestige and enormous popularity. Their victory in 1975 brought the ruthless Pol Pot to power, with King Sihanouk serving, for the first year, as the figurehead president until he was placed under house arrest and fell into a deep depression. Over the next four years, the Khmer Rouge regime led to the death of 1.7 million people and nearly destroyed the country.

	Criticized throughout his life for these dramatic shifts in allegiances, King Sihanouk said he followed only one course in politics: “the defense of the independence, the territorial integrity and the dignity of my country and my people.”


http://time.com/vault/issue/1975-05-05/page/35/
	A Khmer Curtain Descends

	...About all that filtered through the curtain was a statement by Samphan in his radio address that "we will be neutral and nonaligned." Yet Prince Norodum Sihanouk, the Khmer Roughe's figurehead leader, said in Peking that within a year or two most of Southeast Asia would be Communist or pro-Communist, and that one of the Khmer Roughe's first tasks must be to "remove all pro-free world elements."


http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1986-08-08/news/8602270090_1_pol-pot-democratic-kampuchea-khmer-rouge
	Sihanouk Doesn`t Want Trial For Dying Pol Pot

	BANGKOK, THAILAND — Pol Pot, whose three-year rule of Cambodia resulted in the deaths of 2 million people, is dying and should not have to face a tribunal for crimes committed by his Khmer Rouge, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, president of Cambodia`s government in exile, said Thursday.

	...``Putting Pol Pot on trial would only play into the hands of the Vietnamese and the reasons they give for their invasion,`` Sihanouk said.

	Nevertheless, Sihanouk`s sentiments are not shared by all Cambodians, many of whom saw family members killed by Khmer Rouge troops after they defeated the American-backed government of Lon Nol and took control of the country in March, 1975.

	Pol Pot, who has rarely been seen since the Khmer Rouge were forced to abandon Phnom Penh, the capital, for the jungles after the Vietnamese invasion, has been effectively removed from power by the Khmer Rouge hierarchy, Sihanouk said.


how evil is this guy?



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambodian_genocide
	The Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia ended the genocide by defeating the Khmer Rouge in 1979.[6]


https://www.nytimes.com/1979/01/12/archives/sihanouk-appeals-to-un-council-to-get-vietnam-out-of-cambodia-a.html
	Sihanouk Appeals to U.N. Council To Get Vietnam Out of Cambodia

	By MALCOLM W. BROWNE JAN. 12, 1979

	UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 11 —Overcoming opposition by the Soviet Union, Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia succeeded tonight in bringing an official appeal for help against the Vietnamese invasion of his country to the United Nations Security Council.

	...The Cambodian Prince, dressed in dark gray Chinese‐style clothing, charged that Vietnam had committed “flagrant aggression” against his country in the form of “Rommel‐style blitzkrieg,” even though the Cambodian Government it overthrew had been its “brother and comrade‐in‐arms during the war against imperialism.”

	...Although his appeal had the support of all Security Council members except the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, no resolution on Cambodia has any chance of surviving a Soviet veto. Nevertheless, Prince Sihanouk and his supporters achieved a modest parliamentary success tonight in being able to speak at all.

	...Describing the Vietnamese regime as “Hitlerite,” he said Vietnam's Sovietbuilt tanks and planes had caused enormous loss of life, destruction and suffering in the course of the fighting and that Vietnamese troops had systematically looted the towns through which they passed.

	...Earlier in the day, the Vietnamese representative, Ha Van Lau, relayed a note from the new Cambodian Government, stating that it was sending its Foreign Minister, Hun Sen, to the meeting, and that Prince Sihanouk should not be allowed to speak.

	Mr. Lau took the floor after the Chinese address. He charged that the Security Council was violating the United Nations Charter by hearing the Prince at all, as he representated a government no longer in power.

	He charged that the “border war” between the “Pol Pot‐leng Sary clique” in Cambodia against Vietnamese forces had nothing to do with the “civil war” that had just ended inside Cambodia between Cambodian factions.

	Mr. Lau added that all efforts by Hanoi to mediate the border dispute had failed and that Cambodian forces had continued to attack across the border. And he asserted that Vietnam had a “sacred right” to defend itself against Cambodian att tacks.

	The internal struggle resulted, he said, from a continuing wave of atrocities of the Pol Pot Government, which were “condemned by the entire world.” That Government ruthlessly “dissolved existing marriages of the married and forced unwanted marriages on others,” while making killers of the people. It was natural that such a regime should be overthrown, he said, adding that a new and better era was beginning in Cambodia.

	...Cuba's representative, Raul Roa, devoted much of his address to a scornful personal attack on Prince Sihanouk, whom he called an “opera prince” who had become a Chinese pawn under “a senile leader,” a reference to the late Mao Tse‐tung.

	...Prince Sihanouk “did not even incinerate himself like a simple Buddhist monk,” the Cuban added.

	...Prince Listened and Smiled

	The American delegate, Mr. Young, noted that the United Nations had recognized the Pol Pot Government as the legal authority in “Democratic Kampuchea,” and that even if it had been overthrown, its representative had the right to speak here.

	Throughout the debate Prince Sihanouk listened quietly, a smile occasionally playing over his face. Since he understands English, Chinese and Russian, he required no head phones for interpretation.


http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-29106034
	Vietnam launched an invasion of Cambodia in late December 1978 to remove Pol Pot. Two million Cambodians had died at the hands of his Khmer Rouge regime and Pol Pot's troops had conducted bloody cross-border raids into Vietnam, Cambodia's historic enemy, massacring civilians and torching villages.

	Pol Pot fled ahead of the onslaught and Phnom Penh was placed under Vietnamese control in a little over a week.

	Those that survived the Khmer Rouge regime initially greeted the Vietnamese as liberators. Years later, however, Vietnamese troops were still in Cambodia and by then, many Cambodians considered them occupiers.

	Cambodia was an unpopular war for Vietnam, said Carlyle Thayer, an expert on Vietnam and emeritus professor at the University of New South Wales at the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra.

	"The Vietnamese military had been trained and experienced in overthrowing an occupying power and all of a sudden, the shoe was on the other foot. They had to invade Cambodia and occupy it, and succeed in setting up a government and engineer a withdrawal." 


Pol Pot starts genocide, Vietnam overthrows in a week, initially seen as good guys then become unpopular

so Browne was a part of this apparently, shaping perception of Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia that made it unpopular

Pol Pot was still around and still fighting Khmer Rouge at this point--seems like Vietnam withdrawing would have been really bad?


	...Asked about the war, their mood shifted perceptibly. What happened in Cambodia is not something they discuss often.

	One relents, likely out of politeness, and he describes an enduring image from his first days in Cambodia in 1979.

	Le Thanh Hieu's unit pursued the retreating Khmer Rouge to the border with Thailand. He remembers seeing Cambodian villagers lying on the sides of roads dying of starvation and illness.

	"They were dying everywhere. They were dying of hunger," said the 54-year-old. "We didn't have rice to feed the starving. We only had army rations to feed ourselves in battle."

	Yet, he said, "faced with this situation the soldiers could not avoid saving lives" and they used their rations to make a thin rice soup for the starving.

	"I don't want to have this experience to tell you about," Mr Hieu said.


...


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1979/01/11/110996535.pdf
	Security Council to Meet Today on Crisis in Cambodia

	Sihanouk Request to Be Considered Differences With Pol Pot

	UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 10— The 15 nations represented on the United Nations Security Council agreed tonight to convene a formal meeting tomorrow afternoon to consider the Cambodian crisis. 

	...The purpose of the emergency Council meeting was defined in tonight's statement as the consideration of a message sent to the United Nations Jan.3 by the Government of Prime Minister Pol Pot, denouncing Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia and asking for swift intervention by the world organization.

	...The American position in the debate is expected to be somewhat ambiguous. Washington has denounced Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, but has scrupulously avoided any action or statement that would seem to support the Pol Pot regime.

	Differences With Pol Pot

	In his contacts with reporters since arriving, Prince Sihanouk has acknowledged his differences with the Pol Pot regime, but said, "It is no longer a question of political differences or human rights, but a question of whether Cambodia shall disappear from the map, to become a province of the Vietnamese imperialists and their Soviet masters."


this is weird

how could one not see ousting Khmer Rouge anything other than a good thing? if "swift intervention" was needed for anything, it was against Khmer Rouge.

Sihanouk said to have helped Pol Pot rise to power, helped again and fucked over country again speaking out against trial

maybe wanted U.S. to back Pol Pot since fighting Vietnam backed by Soviets?


https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1979/01/13/111068007.html?pageNumber=1
	Red Clash on Cambodia: Big Show at U.N.
	Young Calls Sessions Interesting
	UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 12—Moscow and Peking have locked horns here in one of the harshest diplomatic clashes they have fought in an open international forum since breaking with each other two decades ago. 

	But as they trade charges, insults and veiled threats of war, there is an anomalous air of jollity about the debate on Cambodia, which continued today with a growing number of nations giving their views, both pro- and anti-Soviet, on the situation.

	The atmosphere has none of the grim tension that prevailed when the United Nations was about to go to war over Korea in 1950, nor is any delegate storming out in protest or banging his shoe on a desk, as Kikita S. Krushchev, did in 1960.


this is interesting:

https://books.google.com/books/about/Getting_Away_With_Genocide.html?id=BsmTDAEACAAJ
	This book covers the history of Cambodia since 1979 and the various attempts by the US and China to stop the Cambodian people from bringing the Khmer Rouge to justice. After Vietnam ousted the hated Khmer Rouge regime, much of the evidence needed for a full-scale tribunal became available. In 1979 the US and UK governments, rather than working for human rights justice and setting up a special tribunal, opted instead to back the Khmer Rouge at the UN, and approved the re-supply of Pol Pot's army in Thailand. Tom Fawthrop and Helen Jarvis reveal why it took 18 years for the UN to recognise the mass murder and crimes against humanity that took place under the Killing Fields regime from 1975-78. They explore in detail the role of the UN and the various countries involved, and they assess what chance still remains of holding a Cambodian trial under international law 


from book:


https://books.google.com/books/about/Getting_Away_With_Genocide.html?id=BsmTDAEACAAJ
	Bringing the leaders of the Khmer Rouge to justice is the focus of this
	book. These are some of the worst mass murderers of the twentieth
	century who plunged their country into an unspeakable horror, often
	termed the darkest period in Cambodia’s history. Over 25 per cent of
	the population died under their rule between 1975 and 1979. Why, a
	quarter of a century after the Pol Pot regime was ousted, has no one
	stood in court to answer for these terrible crimes?

	We trace in the fi rst half of the book how the very governments that
	so often speak the language of human rights shielded Pol Pot and his
	lieutenants from prosecution during the 1980s, massively contributing
	to impunity for crimes against the people of Cambodia.

	Most governments ignored efforts inside Cambodia to document
	and prosecute the crimes of Democratic Kampuchea, the offi cial name
	of the Pol Pot regime. For over a decade appeals from Cambodians
	inside and outside the country for a Khmer Rouge tribunal fell on
	deaf ears. The Khmer Rouge were aided and abetted, rebuilt as a
	military force and accorded the right to sit in the United Nations as
	the ‘legitimate representatives of the Cambodian people’


Khmer Rouge recognized as legit gov of Cambodia at U.N., Browne helped add to apperance of legitimacy


	...The International Criminal Court is intended to universalise
	responsibility for crimes under international humanitarian law. But
	the United States has refused to become a party to the ICC, and in
	2003 undertook a campaign to pressurise other countries that are
	members of the ICC to sign specifi c agreements under Article 98 to
	exempt US personnel from possible prosecution under its powers.

	...On 7 January 1979 the Khmer Rouge were driven from Phnom Penh. The Pol Pot regime had been overthrown by 150,000 Vietnamese troops assisted by 15,000 anti-Khmer Rouge Cambodian soldiers who had previously fl ed to Vietnam. On the following day the most grisly evidence of the crimes of the Khmer Rouge was found. Two Vietnamese photojournalists ‘were drawn to a particular compound by the smell of decomposing bodies. The silent malodorous site was surrounded by a corrugated tin fence topped with coils of barbed wire.’ 2 The former Tuol Sleng high school had been transformed by Pol Pot’s regime into its central prison and interrogation centre, known as S-21. The bodies of recently killed prisoners were found, some shackled to iron bed frames, with blood on the fl oor below. They had been killed as their captors made their escape, leaving behind documentary and photographic evidence of the detention of more than 15,000 people. 3 If they survived the interrogation and systematic torture, they were routinely executed on the outskirts of the city at Cheung Ek, one of many ‘Killing Fields’ throughout the country. Only a handful escaped this fate – in 1979 the number was put at seven, but several more have since been identifi ed.


By Jan 7 Khmer Rouge atrocities documented, Pol Pot overthrown

reporting on this spotty? NY Times has nothing Jan 1 - Jan 9

atrocities in Cambodia reported May 13 1975 like this:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/140701024/?terms=cambodia+atrocities
	Kissinger: Cambodia Atrocity

	By JUDSON W. CALKINS

	The mass evacuations of Cambodian urban centers and the execution of officials of the fallen government by the Khmer Rouge were described by secretary of State Henry Kissinger here last night as a "tragedy and an atrocity of major proportions."

	...He described American intelligence reports on events in Cambodia since the Communist take-over as "very clear" and said the deaths there number in the thousands and probably in the tens of thousands.

	Asked by a reporter about reports of "bloodbaths" in the wake of the fall of Cambodia ans South Vietnam, Kissinger said, "I am not aware that I have made a statement that there is a bloodbath in progress in Indochina"

	..."With respect to Cambodia, there is not question but that a tragedy, an atrocity of major proportions is going on. When an entire city of millions is evacuated and the people are marched into the countryside in which there will not be another harvest until November; when hospitals are cleared out, there is no question but that there will be deaths numbering in the thousands and probably in the tens of thousands."

	Kissing said that, in addition, the United States has received isolated reports of executions in some districts of Cambodia. In some instances, these killings have been officials as low as lietenants, and have included their wives, he said.

	One report was of about 90 perosns executed in a single district, the Secretary said. If that figure is extrapolated to cover the entire country, it is possible that the number of executions will go into the hundreds, he said.

	Kissing said that information coming out of South Vietnam indicates "no significant events" of this type at present. 


4 may 1975:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/382680773/?terms=cambodia%2Bbloodbath
	Massive Cambodia Bloodbath Reported

	NEW YORK--Newsweek magazine says it has been told by U.S. officials that thousands of people in Cambodia have been executed by the country's new rulers in a massive bloodbath.

	The magazine said in a news release Saturday night that its May 12 issue, which goes on sale on Monday, reports that the executions could ultimately lead to the killings "of tens of thousands of Cambodians loyal to the Lon Nol regime."


Oct 22 1976:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/24123548/?terms=cambodia%2Bexecutions
	Cambodia executions slacken, sources say

	(UPI)--Communist authorities in Cambodia have slackened, but not halted, the brutal executions that began more than 18 months ago, according to refugees' reports.

	The refugees, who continue to flee to Thailand, also indicate that atrocities virtually have ended. Most executions now are accomplished by gunfire.

	This contrasts with reports on the first year of Communist rule in Cambodia during which almost unbelievable horror stories of execution by clubs, suffocation and bulldozers, were told by hundreds of refugees in Thailand and South Vietnam.

	Most news sources place the number of persons dead in the first year of Communist rule at between 600,000 and one million out of a total population of seven million.


July 27 1977:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/293890643/?terms=cambodia%2Bexecutions
	Cambodia executions reported

	WASHINGTON (AP)--Monstrous measures pursued by the communist government in Cambodia are responsible for the deaths by execution, hunger and disease of "tens if not hundreds of thousands" of people, the Carter administration says.

	...Holbrooke testified, however, that some "journalists and schols guess that between half a million and 1.2 million have died since 1975."

	...And he said he estimated that "for every person executed, several have died of disease or malnutration or other factors, which were avoidable if the government itself had not followed the kind of policy ... which seeks to completely transform a society by applying purely draconian measures."


Jul 10, 1978:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/292739565/?terms=cambodia%2Bexecutions
	Compiled by Gannet News Service

	Cambodia executions

	BANGKOK, Thailand -- The political executions that have stained the three-year history of communist Cambodia continue unabated and may be increasing, according to reports reaching Bangkok. "I have come to the conclusion that Pol Pot views the whole population as expendable," said one Western diplomat who has interviewed many refugees and has access to most of the intelligence information coming from Cambodia.


this is interesting, letter to the editor May 21 1975:

https://www.newspapers.com/image/104652089/?terms=cambodia%2Batrocities
	...After reading detailed accounts in U.S. News & World Report and in the National Observer, accounts brought back by eye-witness correspondents, including Sydney H. Schanberg of the New York Times, I have looked in vain for any mention of this news in The Enquirer. "Hospitals jammed with wounded were emptied, right down to the last patient. They went --limpling, crawling, on crutches, carried on relatives' backs wheeled on their hospital beds" (Schanberg). Surely these reports were newsworthy!

	Then on May 14 I found on page 32 a very small article headlined "Cambodia 'Atrocities' Revealed."

	...Communist atrocity of major propertions -- numbering millions of people -- reported on page 32 of The Enquirer! Page 32! How many of your readers have found this buried article? Is this not a "cover-up"?


might be on to something, "Cambodia executions" was page 8, "Cambodia executions reported" page 5, "Cambodia executions slacken, sources say" page 12, "Massive Cambodia Bloodbath Reported" page 4, "Kissinger: Cambodia Atrocity" page 1


earliest could find in NY Times was this on May 5, 1975, pg 11:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1975/05/05/80037389.html?pageNumber=11

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1975/05/05/80037389.pdf
	CAMBODIAN OFFICERS REPORTED EXECUTED

	WASHINGTON, May 4 Administration sources said today that intelligence reports indicated some Cambodian military officers "less than 100" had been executed by the new Government.

	An official indicated that the reports were sketchy and said that he could not identify any of the military personnel or the circumstances under which they had been slain.

	A White House spokesman said, meanwhile, that he could not confirm a report in the current issue of Time magazine quoting President Ford as informing Republican Congressional leaders of the killings.

	"They killed the wives, too," the President was said to have told the leaders at a meeting last week. "They said the wives were just the same as the husbands. This is a horrible thing to report to you, but we are certain that our sources are accurate."

	Time said 80 Cambodian officers had been executed by the new Government. 


------


read later:

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1978/11/14/112809112.html

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1978/12/04/110977515.html?pageNumber=1

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1979/11/04/113985820.html?pageNumber=12

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/12/08/111322439.html?pageNumber=10

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/02/24/113933369.html

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/02/24/113933369.html

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/03/11/111139484.html?pageNumber=42

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/03/25/112146713.html?pageNumber=43

https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1980/03/25/112146713.html?pageNumber=43