
https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/04/28/alone-not-hasnt-anyone-dropped-earth-visit/#.WQMvYADuCCQ.twitter
	Are we alone? If not, why hasn’t anyone dropped by Earth for a visit?
	David Warmflash 

	This consideration revives Frank’s suggestion that civilizations might not last long enough to colonize star system after star system, meaning that L is a very small number. But it doesn’t make sense that every civilization would not last. A certain number–a fraction that we have no way of knowing right now — must make it through the critical period that we’re living in right now. The late astronomer Carl Sagan called it “technological adolescence”. Either we’ll go extinct — by succumbing to a natural disaster that our technology is not advanced enough to stop (like an immense volcanic eruption), or by destroying ourselves with technology that we’re using irresponsibly (like making nuclear weapons) because our social development is too far behind our technology– or we’ll survive into an age of more advanced technology and greater wisdom.

	If only a fraction of civilizations survive technological adolescence, the Fermi Paradox still holds. This, in turn, raises another possibility, one that is just as simple as the “we are alone” solution, but it’s a lot more appealing. ETs could be aware of us and avoiding us on purpose. Perhaps, they are waiting to initiate a first contact until they think we are ready.


"ready" as in "dead"


	If ETs exist, why have they not made contact with us?

	Surely, you can think of many possible reasons why we are not ready, but if our behavior is shameful perhaps the ETs recall a time in their own history when they were just as bad and their existence hung in the balance. They could be waiting for us to end war and religion and create a planetary government, or they might prefer to avoid interacting with us until that they have to, because we’re about to discover something that will lead us to them.


life on Mars? idk article is weird


	...Whether they await ethical or political developments, or a technological threshold, or both, the idea of patient ETs suggests it could be a long time before humanity experiences its first contact. On the other hand, particularly if it depends on a technological threshold, the first contact with another civilization could be right around the corner. Either way, it seems like a much more reasonable resolution to the Fermi Paradox than the idea that we’re truly, completely alone.


------



https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2015/07/22/a-rabbi-and-an-alien-walk-into-a-bar-what-happens-when-religious-leaders-meet-extraterrestrials/
	A rabbi and an alien walk into a bar: What happens when religious leaders meet extraterrestrials?
	David Warmflash 






------

https://web.archive.org/web/20140824062611/http://freze.it/SitpPS
	Dear Colleagues !

	We need your support in the project "Phobos-Soil", because:
	Two ignitions of Phobos-Grunt engine unit are planned to put spacecraft onto interplanetary mission to Mars. But unfortunately in both cases the operation of spacecraft engine is invisible from Russian ground stations. It is planned to record data about system work during engine operation on-board and when reaching the visibility area of ground stations in Russia to transmit these data to ground. But it is not so comfortable approach especially in case of some deviation from nominal scenario including failure. So there is the idea to observe the engine operation by optical instruments, i.e. telescopes, taking into account the position of spacecraft in eclipse part of the orbit during engine burn and brightness of engine plume ( engine propellant is nonsymmetrical Hydrazine and Nitrogen tetroxide, consumed with the rate of 6 kilos per second). Such approach with fast enough delivery of the results of observations may allow to confirm the very fact of the engine operation and to reach more reliable forecast of spacecraft position when the visibility area from Russian ground stations will be reached. 




------



https://www.universetoday.com/90808/russians-race-against-time-to-save-ambitious-phobos-grunt-mars-probe-from-earthly-demise/
	Russians Race against Time to Save Ambitious Phobos-Grunt Mars Probe from Earthly Demise

	10 Nov , 2011

	...“I give them a good chance — better than even — of recovering the mission and making the Mars insertion burn in a day or two, said James Oberg, a renowned expert on Russian and US spaceflight in commentary to Universe Today.

	But Oberg also told me that having such problems so early in the mission was not a good sign. It all depends on whether the root cause is related to a simple software patch or serious hardware difficulties.

	...“But it’s an old old superstition that when leaving your house for a long voyage, if you trip on the door step, you better just lay down your suitcases and go back inside,” Oberg said.

	“Seriously, on a mission so complex and innovative as this one is, with so much stuff that has to be done RIGHT the first time they’ve ever tried it, having this kind of error — even if it’s only a coding mishap — right at the start, is NOT a good omen about the quality of work on preparing the later steps,” Oberg warned.


http://articles.latimes.com/2011/nov/10/world/la-fg-russia-mars-probe-20111110
	Fear raised that Russia's Phobos-Ground spacecraft will crash

	November 10, 2011

	...If they fail, experts worry that tons of toxic fuel carried by Phobos-Ground could turn it into one of the most dangerous spacecraft to fall from orbit.

	"About 7 tons of nitrogen tetroxide and hydrazine, which could freeze before ultimately entering, will make it the most toxic falling satellite ever," James Oberg, a NASA veteran who now works as a space consultant, said in an email to the Associated Press. "What was billed as the heaviest interplanetary probe ever may become one of the heaviest space derelicts to ever fall back to Earth out of control."

	But Oberg told the AP that it was still possible to regain control of the probe, saying, "Nothing irreversibly bad has happened."



------


http://archive.4plebs.org/pol/thread/80653445/#q80660444
	No surveillance technology is particularly sophisticated. Have you ever spoken something that meant one thing to a broader group, but another to a particular peer because of an inside communication history?

	Highly intelligent individuals are highly adept at this, so we can speak volumes without you even knowing the conversation exists.


------


https://www.universetoday.com/author/david-warmflash/



https://www.universetoday.com/91037/phobos-grunts-mysterious-thruster-activation-a-function-of-safe-mode-or-just-good-luck/
	Phobos-Grunt’s Mysterious Thruster Activation: A Function of Safe Mode or Just Good Luck?

	Article written: 16 Nov , 2011

	by David Warmflash

	Editor’s note: Dr. David Warmflash, principal science lead for the US team from the LIFE experiment on board the Phobos-Grunt spacecraft, provides an update for Universe Today on the likelihood of saving the mission.

	The Phobos-Grunt probe is still stuck in orbit around Earth. However, periodically the spacecraft experiences a mysterious slight boost in its orbit.  Following the first episode where this occurred, commentators speculated as to the cause.  The activation of the spacecraft’s thrusters – the small engines that are designed to steer the craft and make small adjustments  — was an obvious answer.

	Is spacecraft trying to save itself?

	The spacecraft is not responding to any communications, and engineers at the Russian Space Agency Roscosmos have decided that the craft had reverted to a safe mode after the engine of the Fregat rocket stage that was to propel her from a low to a higher orbit around Earth failed to ignite. While in safe mode, the craft had oriented herself to the Sun, using the thrusters to adjust her roll, pitch, and yaw. But to change the parameters of the orbit, she’d need to accelerate, so there was speculation that the needed thrust had come from leaks and venting of gases in a direction favorable to increased orbital stability.

	After a second episode during which the altitude increased again, according to Ria Novosti editor-columnist of the journal “News of Cosmonautics” Igor Lisov has reported that a source in the space industry had explained that the probe “Corrects her orbit” every now and then.

	*Corrects* her orbit? Does this mean that the probe knows where she is?

	Probably not.

	With information coming from Roscosmos being so scarce, reporting on the mission that began was launched on November 9, 2011 has depended on a few official statements from the agency, augmented by speculation from various space experts. Being in safe mode, Grunt simply is waiting for instructions –instructions that controllers are having difficulty delivering, because initial communication was not supposed to take place with the probe at such a low orbit.

	If Grunt’s safe mode includes a program that fires thrusters every so often to keep the craft from entering the atmosphere in the event of a malfunction just after reaching low Earth orbit, no statements from Roscosmos have mentioned it, thus far. Whatever the reason, if it continues to occur, we can expect that the predicted date of atmospheric entry will be moved back again, just as it was moved from late December/early November to mid-January after the first orbital correction episode.

	What might this mean for the mission? First of all, perhaps it could buy more time for controllers to establish communication –although Roscosmos has stated that December is the limit for correcting the problem, despite the fact that the probe will be in space at least until mid January. 

	...As for the question of why a craft that merely is supposed to find the Sun while in safe mode fires thrusters in a direction that improves the orbit, perhaps it is just good luck, or perhaps it really is part of the safe mode. Until Roscosmos provides more information of what may have caused this, the reason for the orbital correction remains a mystery.



https://www.universetoday.com/91127/consolation-prize-for-phobos-grunt-experts-consider-possibilities-for-sending-spacecraft-to-moon-or-asteroid/
	Consolation Prize for Phobos-Grunt? Experts Consider Possibilities for Sending Spacecraft to Moon or Asteroid

	18 Nov, 2011

	by David Warmflash

	If communication with Russia’s troubled Phobos-Grunt is not established by November 21, the window for a trajectory to the Martian moon Phobos, will close, experts say. But this would not mean that the spacecraft could not travel to a different destination. In a statement published earlier today by the news and information agency Ria Novosti, Russian space expert Igor Lisov suggested that Phobos-Grunt could be sent to orbit the Moon – Earth’s Moon, that is – or may be even an asteroid, if communication is restored at any point before the 13-ton probe re-enters Earth’s atmosphere.

	...But while the apogee has been decreasing (down to 326 km today), the perigee actually has been increasing by about 0.5 kilometers per day (up to 210.2 km today), due to periodic maneuvering by way of the probe’s small thrusters. After it was realized that the first maneuvering episode had improved the orbit, the predicted reentry date was adjusted to mid January, and if the thrusting episodes continue we can expect the date of the probe’s demise to be moved back still more.

	Time for Trajectory to Phobos is Running Out

	The improved orbit gives controllers at the Russian Space Agency, Roscosmos, several weeks –even more, if the perigee continues to get higher– to restore communication with Phobos-Grunt, allowing for the uploading of new commands. But, even if control is restored, a flight to Mars and Phobos will not be possible after Monday, November 21st, Lisov explained. Although the Fregat stage is loaded with fuel, to reach Mars, given Grunt’s orbit around Earth and the alignment between Earth and Mars after Monday, would require a higher change in velocity –what propulsion specialists call delta v – than the Fregat is capable of producing.

	A Consolation Prize

	While cautioning that the idea of sending Phobos-Grunt somewhere other than Phobos falls into the realm of wishful thinking, Lisov urged that efforts to reconnect with the spacecraft continue in full force as long as the craft is in space. Despite several failures of lunar missions, the former Soviet space program did succeed in returning samples from the lunar surface to Earth in the 1970s. Thus, re-purposing the current mission as “Luna-Grunt” or something of that nature is not likely to have the same appeal as Phobos-Grunt has among Russians. Nor could the Grunt landing craft, designed to scoop a surface sample into a capsule that would return to Earth, even set down on the lunar surface. But other components of the science payload might be useful. Though built to observe Mars,China’s Yinghuo-1 orbiter might be able to do something interesting from lunar orbit. Instruments that were to remain on the Phobosian surface might be useful as well.


http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/crux/2014/09/08/where-build-off-world-colonies/
	Forget Mars. Here’s Where We Should Build Our First Off-World Colonies
	By David Warmflash

	The collective space vision of all the world’s countries at the moment seems to be Mars, Mars, Mars.

	...But is the Red Planet really the best target for a human colony, or should we look somewhere else? Should we pick a world closer to Earth, namely the moon? Or a world with a surface gravity close to Earth’s, namely Venus?


http://www.visionlearning.com/blog/2017/03/14/colonization-venusian-clouds-surfacism-clouding-judgement/
	March 14, 2017
	Colonization of the Venusian Clouds: Is ‘Surfacism’ Clouding Our Judgement?

	by David Warmflash

	...Mars has other problems. The regolith –the dirt that covers the Martian surface– contains high concentrations of perchlorate salts, which will be toxic to humans and plants if we don’t filter them out. The low gravity and the thin atmosphere advantageous as they make it easy to get spaceships up and down between the surface and space. But while the atmosphere is too thin to provide any useful air pressure on the human body, it is just thick enough to lift dust to mess up equipment and there are even dust storms.



https://www.universetoday.com/91207/can-phobos-grunt-still-be-saved-scientists-hold-out-hope-as-deadlines-loom/
	Can Phobos-Grunt Still be Saved? Scientists Hold Out Hope as Deadlines Loom

	22 Nov 2011
	by David Warmflash

	...Although the launch window for a round-trip to Mars closed yesterday (November 21, 2011) with Russia’s Phobos-Grunt probe still circling in low Earth orbit, a one-way flight to the Red Planet will be possible for another few weeks. As Russian engineers frantically try to contact the silent probe, scientists from the Yinghuo-1 and LIFE experiments are holding out hope that they could still complete their missions, or a perhaps even a modified version of their experiments.

	...Thought to have reverted to safe mode, Phobos-Grunt has been flying straight and periodically adjusting her orbit using small thruster engines. While this maneuvering has extended the amount of time that the probe can remain in space before reentering Earth’s atmosphere, ground controllers have been struggling to establish a communication link.

	...Had the malfunction occurred just one step further into the flight –after a first burn of the Fregat was to raise the apogee (the highest point) of the spacecraft’s orbit to an altitude of about 4,170 kilometers– the timing and geometry between Earth-bound transmitters and the spacecrafts antennae would have made signaling the craft a straight forward task. But with Grunt orbiting much lower (thus moving much faster with respect to the ground), and with an antenna that could receive the signal obstructed partially by a fuel tank that was to be jettisoned after the first Fregat burn, controllers have only a couple of minutes at a time to attempt communication. Since the spacecraft was not designed for this scenario, getting her attention may be depend on prospect of getting the signals toward her at some unlikely angle. In other words, restoring control over Phobos-Grunt may be a matter of luck.

	...If this should happen, however, where should the probe travel? As of yesterday, it no longer will be able to go Mars, land on the surface of Phobos, scoop a 200 gram sample into the specially-designed return capsule, and still have a window for the capsule to be launched on a trajectory back to Earth. Last week, a lunar mission was discussed as a possibility.


http://www.planetary.org/blogs/emily-lakdawalla/2011/3261.html
	"We have time till January inclusive, the spacecraft will stay in orbit, but the Mars departure window closes in early December," said the Head of Roskosmos Vladimir Popovkin today.

	"There is still a chance, but we were not able to receive any telemetry yet to understand what happened. The problem is that tracking stations are slow [that is, they cannot turn fast enough to track a fast-moving spacecraft on a low-Earth orbit] and Phobos-Grunt is on an unplanned trajectory, hence the communication session lasts for only 7 minutes."

	"All systems of the spacecraft work nominally, it maintains its orientation toward the Sun, so it's not over yet. At the moment engineers conduct attempts to upload software."

	Answering journalists' questions regarding when it would be possible with a high degree of certainty to talk about the "spacecraft death", he said that "it would be possible to talk about this in early December when the window for departure to Mars is closed."


https://www.universetoday.com/91239/contact-established-with-phobos-grunt-spacecraft-can-the-mission-go-on/
	Contact Established with Phobos-Grunt Spacecraft — Can the Mission Go On?

	23 Nov , 2011
	by David Warmflash

	In an exciting development in the ongoing story of the Phobos-Grunt mission, a tracking station at Perth, Australia established contact with the Russian spacecraft on November 22 at 20:25 UT. This was the first signal received on Earth since the mission to Mars’ moon was launched on November 8, 2011.

	Teams from ESA, who made the initial contact, are now working closely with engineers in Russia to determine how best to maintain communications with the spacecraft. As controllers begin the task of figuring out how to use this achievement to enable sending the spacecraft new commands, discussion is ongoing on whether the launch window will still be open for the craft to complete the mission.

	...Before contact was made, some reports said that if contact was made by November 24, the mission could proceed as planned, while other experts were saying that the launch window to complete the sample return mission closed on November 21.



https://www.universetoday.com/91386/canary-islands-antenna-being-modified-to-boost-signal-to-struggling-russian-mars-probe/
	Canary Islands Antenna Being Modified to Boost Signal to Struggling Russian Mars Probe

	30 Nov, 2011
	by David Warmflash

	...Last week, ESA succeeded in communicating with Phobos-Grunt on two successive days after a feedhorn antenna was added to an antenna near Perth, Australia similar to the facility in Maspalomas. Although this enabled the downloading of spacecraft telemetry, attempts later in the week to make renewed contact failed. After no attempts were made over the weekend, commands aimed at getting the spacecraft to boost its orbit were sent yesterday, also from Perth, but tracking this morning revealed that the commands had not been executed.

	...Although Phobos-Grunt was delivered into space nearly three weeks ago by a Zenit 2 rocket launch that appeared flawless, an upper stage rocket known as Fregat failed to ignite. This left the spacecraft in a low Earth orbit that improved as a result of the automated maneuvering, but that will decay by mid-January if the altitude is not boosted more significantly. 

	...Should this result in the spacecraft executing commands to climb to a higher orbit, further communication and diagnosis of spacecraft systems then would become much easier.


https://www.universetoday.com/91646/not-giving-up-yet-esa-resumes-effort-to-communicate-with-phobos-grunt/
	Not Giving Up Yet: ESA Resumes Effort to Communicate with Phobos-Grunt

	7 Dec, 2011
	by David Warmflash

	Russia’s Phobos-Grunt spacecraft is in no better position than it was a month ago, when it reached low Earth orbit on November 9 yet failed to ignite the upper stage engine that was to propel it to Phobos, the larger of Mars’ two small moons. Indeed, with an orbit measuring 204.823 kilometers at perigee (the low point) and 294.567 kilometers at apogee as of today, the spacecraft is well on its well to a fiery reentry through Earth’s atmosphere in early January if it cannot be rescued in the intervening time. 

	...Despite success in contacting Grunt and getting it to send telemetry two weeks ago using a modified antenna in Perth Australia, subsequent attempts to command the spacecraft to boost her orbit failed.

	Then last week, after modifying another antenna, this one in Maspalomas on the Canary Islands, the European Space Agency (ESA) announced that efforts to track and communicate with the spacecraft would end. As a result, any remaining hope that the craft might at least be boosted to a more stable orbit to allow for diagnoses and eventual repair faded away.

	But, in response to requests from the Russian Space Agency (Roscosmos), ESA now has decided to renew tracking and communications efforts from the Maspalomas station. Located off of the northwest coast of Africa, Maspalomas is well-situated with respect to Phobos-Grunt’s course around Earth. Since fewer communication attempts have been made from Maspalomas as compared with Perth, ESA and Roscosmos may be thinking that not all potential tricks to get the geometry right have been exhausted. Thus, new attempts to hail the unpiloted science probe began on Monday and will continue through Friday, December 9th. Presumably, ESA would continue to support the mission beyond Friday, if anything happens suggesting that Phobos-Grunt has received the instructions and is capable of responding, even in part.

	...Designed to land on the surface of Phobos, the Grunt spacecraft carries about 50 kilograms of scientific equipment built to make celestial and geophysical measurements, and to conduct mineralogical and chemical analysis of the regolith (crushed rock and dust) of the tiny moon. The chemical analysis that is to be conducted includes a search for organic matter, the building material for life. Studies to be conducted on the Phobosian surface potentially could elucidate the origins of Phobos and the other Martian moon, Deimos. Additionally, the presence of organic matter on Phobos would suggest that the surface of Mars itself contains organics.

	...Although the window for a trip to Mars is about to close, should control over Phobos-Grunt be restored, it might be kept in a higher orbit for two years, or sent to an alternate destination, such as Earth’s own Moon, or an asteroid. 


https://www.universetoday.com/91741/a-day-in-the-sun-will-it-make-a-difference-for-russias-phobos-grunt/
	A Day in the Sun: Will It Make a Difference for Russia’s Phobos-Grunt?

	13 Dec , 2011
	By David Warmflash

	It has been trapped in low Earth orbit for more than a month. So low is the orbit that it moves too fast to be contacted – unless controllers on the ground just happen to beam a signal at some unlikely angle. So short does its battery power last that it must be in sunlight while also in position to receive signals. Then, it must still have power to send telemetry back to the ground.

	Even with these obstacles, Russia’s Phobos- Grunt probe did manage to communicate with the European Space Agency’s (ESA) antenna in Perth, Australia twice a couple of weeks ago, indicating that some of its systems were functioning. But subsequent attempts at communication have failed, despite the addition of ESA’s Canary Islands antenna at Maspalomas to the worldwide effort to reestablish control over the spacecraft.

	Tracking of Grunt’s orbit has shown that its high point (apogee) and low point (perigee) continue to decrease, measuring about 289 kilometers and 203 kilometers in altitude, respectively, the last time I checked. Stories out of Russia in recent days describe how electrical cables found to be malfunctioning weeks before the launch were cut and connections re-soldered in a hurry to have the craft ready. Add to this the fact that the major sources on developments with the Grunt mission since its November 9 launch – Ria Novosti, the Russian Space Web, and ESA operations – all expect the craft to reenter Earth’s atmosphere in early January.

	Taking all of this into account, it seems unlikely that Phobos-Grunt will ever respond to a signal again and say, “privyet’, much less turn on its engines and warp out of orbit. But there is an opportunity coming, a period when the odds that are stacked against the spacecraft may improve just a little.

	Beginning Tuesday, December 13 at 17:00 universal time (UT) to Wednesday December 14, 23:00, Phobos-Grunt will be in sunlight throughout its entire orbit. It is not completely clear whether or not ESA will attempt to contact the probe during this period from Perth, or Maspalomas. Although attempts from Maspalomas were made throughout last week, the same attempts were scheduled to end on Friday, December 9. On the other hand, in a letter informing scientists participating in the mission that failure was the outcome, Phobos-Grunt science director, Lev Zelenyi, wrote: “Lavochkin Association specialists will continue their attempts to establish connection with the spacecraft and send commands until the very end of its existence.” Thus, despite the fact that the Russian Grunt team now is focused on the issue of reentry, we should not be surprised if they ask ESA to make one more attempt on Tuesday.

	Will the greater than usual amount of sunlight allow the spacecraft’s communication system to work better than it usually does when it travels over tracking stations? Maybe yes, and maybe no. We should not get our hopes up that the craft will actually do anything but fall to Earth, and we’ve already discussed the possibility of the craft’s return capsule coming back in one piece.

	But let us allow Phobos-Grunt its day in the Sun.



https://www.universetoday.com/91766/russian-space-program-prepares-for-phobos-grunt-re-entry/
	Russian Space Program Prepares for Phobos-Grunt Re-Entry

	13 Dec , 2013
	by David Warmflash

	As last-ditch efforts to recover control of the unpiloted Phobos-Grunt spacecraft continue, officials, engineers, and scientists at the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos) have shifted their focus to the issue of reentry.

	...While efforts to hail Phobos-Grunt will continue until the craft actually begins a fiery descent in January, Roscosmos is moving forward on several unpiloted missions to explore Earth’s own Moon, beginning within the next 2-3 years.



https://www.universetoday.com/91832/russian-lunar-exploration-program-at-full-speed-despite-failure-of-mars-moon-probe/
	Russian Lunar Exploration Program at Full Speed, Despite Failure of Mars Moon Probe

	15 Dec , 2011
	by David Warmflash

	While the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos) prepares for the pending destruction of its Phobos-Grunt spacecraft, an ambitious program focusing on lunar exploration is moving to center stage. Although the Soviet Union launched three successful lunar sample return missions, the last such probe was Luna-24, in 1976.

	...Previously, I’ve used the term Luna-Grunt in reference to a re-purposed Phobos-Grunt, sent to orbit Earth’s own Moon, if control is restored but too late to send it to the Martian moon Phobos. But Grunt is the Russian word for “ground,” or “soil.” Just as Phobos-Grunt was designed to analyze and return Phobosian regolith (not actually soil, but crushed rock and dust on the surface of a celestial body), Russia’s Luna-Grunt program will study lunar regolith. Currently, two Luna-Grunt spacecraft are planned, each featuring an orbiter and a lander.

	...While the lunar missions to be launched during the next half decade will be unpiloted, statements by various Russian scientists and cosmonauts in recent months suggest that Roscosmos is interested in Earth’s companion as a location for a lunar base, or even a colony .


https://www.universetoday.com/92147/phobo-grunt-predicted-to-fall-in-afghanistan-on-january-14/
	Phobos-Grunt Predicted to Fall in Afghanistan on January 14

	24 Dec , 2016
	by David Warmflash


	...For a while, space commentators considered the possibility that Grunt might be sent on an alternate mission to Earth’s Moon or an asteroid, if control could be restored after the window for a launch to Mars and Phobos was lost. During the past few weeks, the European Space Agency (ESA) started and ended efforts to communicate with the spacecraft on several occasions, but succeeded only twice. Various scenarios were imagined in which aspects of the probe’s mission could be salvaged, despite the serious malfunction that prevented the craft from leaving Earth orbit. But at this point, the only direction for the spacecraft to go is down.



https://www.universetoday.com/94972/sam-nasas-attempt-to-repeat-vikings-search-for-martian-organics/
	SAM: NASA’s Attempt to Repeat Viking’s Search for Martian Organics

	3 May , 2012

	After 36 years of debate, confusion, and failed attempts by other space agencies to answer a basic question, NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) is on its way to repeat the search for organic matter that eluded the two Viking probes.

	With 96 days left until landing, MSL will touch down at the Gale Crater this August. The rover, called Curiosity, will be the largest vehicle delivered to our neighboring planet thus far. Weighing in at 900 kg, Curiosity is nearly five times as large as the Spirit and Opportunity rovers that landed eight years ago, and more than 1.5 times as large as each Viking lander that arrived on planet in 1976.

	Like the Vikings and Mars Exploration Rovers, Curiosity was conceived and launched, largely to gather information that may tell us whether the Red Planet harbors microbial life. Instrumentation launched for in situ analysis has been advancing steadily since the Viking era, yet each chapter in the story of the search for Martian life builds upon the previous ones.

	Though usually mentioned only briefly in the days when Spirit and Opportunity were making headlines, the twin Viking landers were amazing craft, not only for their time, but even for today. The instrument suite of each Viking lander included a suite of three biology experiments, instruments designed for the direct detection of microbes, should the regolith at either of the two Viking landing sites contain any. While subsequent landing craft have carried instruments designed to assess Mars’ potential for life, none since the Project Viking has been built to look for Martian life forms directly.

	According to Viking investigator Gilbert Levin, the Viking landers already discovered Martian life. Back in 1976-1977, Levin’s instrument, known as the Labeled Release (LR) experiment, yielded positive results at Chryse Planitia and Utopia Planitia, the two Viking landing sites. When treated with a solution containing small, organic chemicals labeled with radioactive carbon, regolith samples taken at the landing sites released a gas, indicated by an increase in radioactivity in the space above the sample.

	While Levin believes the gas is carbon dioxide resulting from the oxidation of the organic chemicals, it’s also conceivable that the chemicals were reduced to another gas, methane. Either way, since heating the samples to a temperature high enough to kill most of the microbes that we know on Earth prevented the gas release, the Viking science team concluded initially that the LR had detected life.

	Most of the science team, but not Levin, decided that the gas release in the LR must have resulted from a non-biological chemical reaction. This rethinking was due to variety of factors, but the most important of which was that the gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (GC-MS) of each lander failed to detect organic matter in the samples. As the late Carl Sagan explained it on his television series, Cosmos, “If there is life on Mars, where are the dead bodies?”

	While most astrobiologists and planetary scientists do not agree with Levin that the results of his 36 year-old experiment constitute conclusive evidence for Martian life, there is a growing number of Mars scientists who are equivocal on the issue. According to Levin, Sagan moved into the equivocal category in 1996, after astrobiologist David McKay and colleagues published a paper in the journal Science describing fossilized life in meteorite ALH84001, one of a handful of meteorites known to be from Mars.

	Traveling within Curiosity’s enormous instrument package is a suite of machines called SAM, which stands for “Sample Analysis at Mars”. After all of these years, SAM represents NASA’s first attempt to repeat Viking’s search for Martian organics, but with more advanced technology.

	This is not to say that other attempts were not made during the intervening years. In 1996, the Russian Federal Space Agency launched a Mars-bound probe carrying not only organic chemistry equipment but an upgraded version of Levin’s experiment. Rather than treating regolith samples with a mixture of “right-handed” and “left-handed” forms of organic substrates (known in chemistry as racemic mixtures), the new LR would have treated some samples with a left-handed substrate (L-cysteine) and others with the substrate’s mirror image (D-cysteine).

	Had results been the same for L- and D-cysteine, a non-biological mechanism would have seemed all the more likely. However, if the active agent in the Martian regolith favored one compound at the expense of the other, this would indicate life. Even more intriguing: if the active agent favored D-cysteine, it would have suggested an origin of life on Mars separate from the origin of life on Earth, since terrestrial life forms use mostly left-handed amino acids. Such a result would suggest that life originates fairly easily, implying a cosmos teaming with living forms.

	But Russia’s Mars ’96 probe crashed in the Pacific Ocean shortly after liftoff. A few years later, the European Space Agency sent Beagle 2 to Mars, carrying an advanced organic detection package, but this probe too was lost.


------


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/04/28/alone-not-hasnt-anyone-dropped-earth-visit/
	Are we alone? If not, why hasn’t anyone dropped by Earth for a visit?
	David Warmflash

	In the media, questions about astrobiology always devolve into a single issue: Are we alone? Are humans the only technological civilization that exists currently in the cosmos, or are we one of many? Are other worlds home to civilizations of intelligent life forms, or intelligent machines with biological ancestors?

	The discovery of thousands of planets around nearby stars in recent years has led astronomers to calculate a presence of 15 billion to 30 billion Earth-like planets in our galaxy alone, yet we haven't encountered any extraterrestrials (ETs).

	Those hard realities shine a spotlight on an old problem known as the Fermi Paradox, for Enrico Fermi, the Nobel Prize winning physicist who came up with it back in the 1950s.

	...Being a nuclear physicist focused on technological applications of the science, Fermi must have realized the potential of nuclear energy to propel a spaceship over enormous distances. And so, in 1950, after hearing a lot of speculation on the likelihood of sentient life forms existing on other worlds, he calculated that they ought to have arrived long ago. Numerous ET species from various worlds should have arrived on Earth. But they weren't here and that was the paradox.

	...The huge amount of potential homeworlds for ET civilizations brings the Fermi Paradox to center stage. University of Rochester astrophysicist Adam Frank is now unpacking the question of "why aren't the ETs here yet?"

	...Back in the 1960s, astronomer Frank Drake wrote up what came to be known as the Drake Equation.

	N = R* fp ne fl fi fc L

	It's a series of variables that get multiplied by one another, starting with the rate of star formation in the galaxy (R*), which represents the number of stars. That's multiplied by the fraction of stars that have planets (fp) and by a factor representing the number of planets with environments that could support life per star that has planets (ne). This produces a number of Earth-like planets in the galaxy. That was hypothetical when Drake came up with the equation, because the only fractions that could be plugged in for fp and ne were mere guesses.

	Today, though, because of new planet discoveries, the first three variables of the Drake Equation are hard numbers. They'll probably be tweaked in the years to come with new planet search instruments in space, but that census result of 15 billion to 30 billion Earth-like planets makes the whole thing a lot less hypothetical than it used to be. The rest of variables represent the fraction of Earthlike worlds that actually develop life, the fraction of those worlds that develop intelligent, sentient life forms, the fraction of worlds with intelligent life whose intelligent beings develop technology and finally the longevity factor "L", how long that technology-bearing species endures.

	...Surviving 'technological adolescence'

	That's where the longevity factor, L, comes in. If we use 30,000 as the number of worlds that harbored a civilization at any point over the last 10 billion years, and if we guess that a typical civilization lasts 10 million years before it collapses into a dark age or its species goes extinct, that would mean that we Earthlings are 1 of about 30 civilizations in our galaxy. We'd be the most primitive one, of course, since we literally just acquired the earliest technology for communicating over space.

	There's no good reason for making L 10 million years, except that it makes the math really easy, but you can raise the number from 10 million or drop it and see what it does to the odds of finding some other civilization. If we stay with the 10 million year value, it means that the home planet of the closest ET civilization is really far away, but over millions of years a species could colonize star system after star system in short hops. That should have brought somebody here by now, just as Fermi guessed, and a continuous colonization wave would very likely raise the life expectancy of the species far beyond 10 million years to the lifetime of the galaxy, or beyond.

	This consideration revives Frank’s suggestion that civilizations might not last long enough to colonize star system after star system, meaning that L is a very small number. But it doesn’t make sense that every civilization would not last. A certain number–a fraction that we have no way of knowing right now — must make it through the critical period that we’re living in right now. The late astronomer Carl Sagan called it “technological adolescence”. Either we’ll go extinct — by succumbing to a natural disaster that our technology is not advanced enough to stop (like an immense volcanic eruption), or by destroying ourselves with technology that we’re using irresponsibly (like making nuclear weapons) because our social development is too far behind our technology– or we’ll survive into an age of more advanced technology and greater wisdom.




https://web.archive.org/web/20151221133614/https://www.geneticliteracyproject.org/2015/07/22/a-rabbi-and-an-alien-walk-into-a-bar-what-happens-when-religious-leaders-meet-extraterrestrials/
	A rabbi and an alien walk into a bar: What happens when religious leaders meet extraterrestrials?

	David Warmflash

	*A single message from space will show that it is possible to live through technological adolescence…It is possible that the future of human civilization depends on the receipt of interstellar messages.*

	That famous quote comes from Carl Sagan in his article “The Quest for Extraterrestrial Intelligence”, published in Smithsonian magazine, May, 1978. It caused quite a kerfuffle. In the 1997 film Contact, based on Sagan’s 1985 novel about humanity getting its first proof of an extraterrestrial civilization in the form of an interstellar radio transmission, one of the characters says this:

    	*My coalition’s phone lines have been flooded with calls from concerned families, wondering if this message signifies the end of the world or the advent of the rapture. We feel that U.S. policy in this matter wants to be extremely conservative – if there’s any chance of danger or threat to our way of life perhaps the message and its contents should simply be disregarded.*

	Portrayed by actor Rob Lowe, the character is a social conservative political leader. The contrast with the enthusiastic scientist protagonist, Ellie Arroway, played by Jodie Foster, could be a good model for what might really happen if we do discover real evidence of an ET civilization during an era when our own civilization still looks something like it does today. Looking as it does today means having political and social groups that might welcome the news alongside other political and social groups that might rather not have confirmation that this little rock on which we live is not the only place in our galaxy that gave rise to sentient, technologically savvy beings — a galaxy containing billions of Earth-like planets, within a universe containing hundreds of billions of galaxies.

	Just considering the numbers should make anyone think that only extreme human arrogance, bordering on psychosis, could lead anyone to think seriously that we are the only creatures in the universe that got to this point, and that nobody else is ahead of us. But we’re isolated on our world, involved in our local problems, and, so far, nobody is talking to us.

	That perspective almost automatically brings up the topic of religion, and organized religion in particular, since the latter has set stories and explanations regarding how we got here and our place in the cosmos. Needless to say, Carl Sagan realized that the moment of first contact would put many aspects of society on a collision course with the future, but the religious component of society in particular will probably struggle with it, perhaps even put up resistance.

	...Given the gravity of the likely religious reaction to a successful SETI, astronomy professor David Weintraub of Vanderbilt University has investigated organized religions for writings and other communications that might be clues of how they would react to a first contact. He consulted and otherwise checked with leaders of more than two dozen major religions and came up with some interesting trends that could serve as a clue. For instance, on simply believing in the existence of intelligent extraterrestrials, the percentage of atheists saying yes is 55 percent.

	That seems low and suggests that even among atheists, 45 percent would be shocked to learn that we’re not alone. 

	...at least some elements of the world’s religions are ready, in their own minds at least, for the discovery of extraterrestrial beings. But that begs another question: Will the extraterrestrials be equally ready to deal with Earth’s religious leaders?


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/04/28/alone-not-hasnt-anyone-dropped-earth-visit/
	Are we alone? If not, why hasn’t anyone dropped by Earth for a visit?
	David Warmflash

	...If only a fraction of civilizations survive technological adolescence, the Fermi Paradox still holds. This, in turn, raises another possibility, one that is just as simple as the “we are alone” solution, but it’s a lot more appealing. ETs could be aware of us and avoiding us on purpose. Perhaps, they are waiting to initiate a first contact until they think we are ready.

	If ETs exist, why have they not made contact with us?

	Surely, you can think of many possible reasons why we are not ready, but if our behavior is shameful perhaps the ETs recall a time in their own history when they were just as bad and their existence hung in the balance. They could be waiting for us to end war and religion and create a planetary government, or they might prefer to avoid interacting with us until that they have to, because we’re about to discover something that will lead us to them.



------



https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/05/12/creating-superwoman-man-benefits-human-enhancement/#.WRWx7rFlFLM.twitter
	Creating Superwoman (and man): Who benefits from human enhancement?
	David Warmflash

	...Using genetic modification, nanotechnology, bionics, reconstructive surgery, hormones, drugs or any combination of these approaches, real-life human enhancement is looking ever more achievable. 

	...the potential for emerging, enhancement-relevant innovations to change humanity is pretty big, and this means that all of the discussion and debate is a good thing. We should embrace that, along with the emerging technology itself as we move forward


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/02/13/our-cyborg-future-how-the-wealthy-will-reshape-our-humanness/
	Enhancing humans: Becoming a cyborg could end up as a privilege of the wealthy

	David Warmflash

	...As AI advances, machine technology is expected to merge with humans, as it has already begun to do. Today, it’s routine for people to have implanted drug infusion pumps, cardiac pacemakers, and other devices, and the day is coming when artificial organs–machine hearts, livers, and kidneys–will not only be available, but preferable to a donor organ. Along with that will come true, fully-functinal and cosmetically appealing bionic limbs, eyes, and ears, and brain implants and interfaces could be possible to give people a boost in memory capacity and even information. Imagine having the Internet connected directly to your brain.

	The options for human enhancement seem endless and Hebrew University’s Professor Yuval Noah Harari believes that many humans will eventually take on new forms.

	...But Harari is right that we’re moving into an age of human enhancement, and he’s fairly hopeful that there will be positive consequences. In particular, he expects the cyborgazation of humans to end religion. That may be a tall order at Hebrew University, located in Jerusalem, where people still come from all over the planet to pray to a stone wall, but Harari is thinking in terms of centuries. In Western Europe, North America, and other developed countries, people are dropping organized religion.


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/07/28/views-religion-astrology-new-age-beliefs-hardwired/
	Are our views on religion, astrology and new-age beliefs hardwired?

	David Warmflash

	...In turns out that patterns in these genes relate to how susceptible one is to confirmation bias – the tendency to interpret new information (or to remember information) in a way that confirms one’s beliefs. Not only is confirmation bias strong in religious believers and those who believe in astrology, psychics, and other pseudosciences, but it’s also been shown to be largely independent of one’s educational level.

	Between the Millennial and Boomer generations is Generation X, whose members, like Millennials, also cling much less to traditional religion compared with older generations. Clearly, the basis of such dramatic changes in belief must be environmental (cultural and society) rather than genetic, and it could be that astrology and other “new age” beliefs are rapidly replacing traditional religious ideas.

	Thus, while susceptibility to bias and “spiritual” thinking (for lack of a better term) seems to be influenced to some extent by biology...


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/06/06/bell-curve-redux-science-intelligence-taboo-research/
	Bell Curve redux: Is the science of intelligence too taboo to research?
	David Warmflash | June 6, 2017 |

	...It should be possible to accept this idea, as we accept it when it comes to height, athletic ability, risk for specific diseases, and so many other traits. Doing so, whether or not one is convinced by the math of The Bell Curve, Harris has noted that it would be surprising if such a trait were identical between any groups of humans that have been reproductively isolated, including the groupings of that have come to be known as races.

	...Second, with the brain-relevant genetic data coming in, there are bound to be surprises. Indeed, we have had some already, such as the finding that Caucasians and Asians have significant amounts of Neanderthal genetic sequences, whereas sub-Saharan Africans have almost none.


https://twitter.com/CosmicEvolution/status/901203566597218305
	Dr. David Warmflash‏ @CosmicEvolution

	Dr. David Warmflash Retweeted Genetic Literacy

	Really fascinating. And we're in for a huge public discussion.. #neuroscience #genetics

		Genetic Literacy @GeneticLiteracy
		22 genes linked to increased intelligence


https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2017/07/17/unwanted-genes-cant-just-edit-lives/#.WWy1rJpU4vc.twitter
	Unwanted genes: Why can’t we just edit them out of our lives?
	David Warmflash


http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/crux/2014/08/08/should-patients-be-given-experimental-ebola-drugs/
	Should Patients Be Given Experimental Ebola Drugs?
	By David Warmflash | August 8, 2014 3:07 pm 

	...But there is one thing that Ebola virus disease certainly does have in common with the fictional pandemic of The Last Ship: the potential to cause panic on a planetary scale. In the words of Admiral Konstantin Nicolayevitch Ruskov, the series villain, “The fear spread[s] even quicker than the virus itself.” And based on a series of headlines, such as “Ebola is already in the US”, followed by a string of tweets from Donald Trump saying that people who travel to Ebola-endemic areas to help must “suffer the consequences” to prevent “spread inside our borders”, Ebola panic is already mounting. In terms of human behavior, the science fiction writers have scored a bull’s eye.

	...And it’s an open question whether, if supplies come through, treating infected Africans with experimental drugs is a good idea. Many in the health community endorse the treatment of the two infected Americans with ZMapp. But African patients may be wary of an experimental treatment, and furthermore the drugs could have unknown harms. “As doctors, trying an untested drug on patients is a very difficult choice since our first priority is to do no harm,” NGO Doctors Without Borders said in a statement earlier this week.

